=== PAGE 23 ===
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use
This section describes a Tier 1 default method and a more advanced Tier 3 facility-level method for CH from
4
sinter production or iron production, both of which are similar to the approaches described for estimating CO
2
emissions. There is no Tier 2 method. CH may be emitted from steel–making processes as well, however those
4
emissions are assumed to be negligible. Therefore CH emissions from steel-making processes are not discussed
4
here.
The Tier 1 methodology for CH is based on emission factors and national production statistics.
4
EQUATION 4.12
CH 4 EMISSIONS FROM SINTER PRODUCTION (TIER 1)
Sinter Production: E =SI•EF
CH4,non−energy SI
EQUATION 4.13
CH 4 EMISSIONS FROM BLAST FURNACE PRODUCTION OF PIG IRON (TIER 1)
Pig Iron Production: E =PI•EF
CH4,non−energy PI
EQUATION 4.14
CH 4 EMISSIONS FROM DIRECT REDUCED IRON PRODUCTION (TIER 1)
Direct Reduced Iron Production: E =DRI•EF
CH4,non−energy DRI
Where:
E = emissions of CH to be reported in IPPU Sector, kg
CH4, non-energy 4
SI = quantity of sinter produced nationally, tonnes
PI = quantity of iron produced nationally including iron converted to steel and not converted to steel,
tonnes
DRI = quantity of direct reduced iron produced nationally, tonnes
EF = emission factor, kg CH /tonne x produced
x 4
The Tier 3 method uses plant specific emissions data. If actual measured CH emissions data are available for
4
coke production, these data can be aggregated to account for national CH emissions. Total national emissions
4
will equal the sum of emissions reported from each facility.
4.2.2.3 CHOICE OF EMISSION FACTORS
TIER 1 METHOD
Carbon dioxide emission factors
Table 4.1 provides default emission factors for coke, sinter, pellet, iron, and steel production. The emission
factors for the three steelmaking methods are based on expert judgment using typical practice for the different
steel production scenarios listed. The default emission factors account for all carbon input into the blast furnace.
It is assumed based on the Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control (IPPC) Reference Document on
Production of Iron and Steel (European IPPC Bureau, 2001) (referred to in this section as ‘IPPC I&S BAT
Document’) that most of the carbon input to the blast furnace is from coke (60 -90 percent).
The default CO emission factor for coke production is derived by averaging plant-specific CO emissions data
2 2
for 11 European coke plants reported in the IPPC I&S BAT Document. Emissions of CO are reported in Table
2
6.2 of the IPPC I&S BAT Document in units of kilograms of CO per tonne of liquid steel produced. The CO
2 2
emissions range from 175 to 200 kg CO per tonne liquid steel. The conversion factors provided in Table 6.2 of
2
the IPPC Document are 940 kg pig iron per tonne liquid steel and 358 kg coke per tonne pig iron. Based on these
conversion factors the average CO emissions from the 11 European coke plants is 0.56 tonne CO per tonne
2 2
coke produced.
The CO emission factor for sinter plants is derived by averaging plant-specific CO emissions data for four
2 2
European sinter plants reported in the IPPC I&S BAT Document. Emissions of CO are reported in Table 4.1 of
2
4.24 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories
=== PAGE 24 ===
Chapter 4: Metal Industry Emissions
the IPPC I&S BAT Document in units of kilograms of CO per tonne of liquid steel produced. The CO
2 2
emissions range from 205 to 240 kg CO per tonne liquid steel. The conversion factors provided in Table 4.1 of
2
the IPPC I&S BAT Document are 940 kg pig iron per tonne liquid steel and 1160 kg sinter per tonne pig iron.
Based on these conversion factors the average CO emissions from the four European sinter plants is 0.2 kg CO
2 2
per kg sinter produced.
The CO emission factor for blast furnace iron making is derived by averaging plant-specific CO emissions data
2 2
for European sinter plants reported in the IPPC I&S BAT Document. The CO and CO content of blast furnace
2
gas produced by the iron making process is reported in Tables 7.2 and 7.3 of the IPPC I&S BAT Document in
units of kilograms of CO per tonne of pig iron produced and kilograms of CO per tonne of pig iron produced.
2
The CO content ranges from 400 to 900 kg CO per tonne pig iron produced and the CO content ranges from
2 2
300 to 700 kg CO per tonne of pig iron produced. Based on the assumption that all of the blast furnace gas
burned for energy recovery (and combusted to CO ) within the integrated iron and steel mill and that no blast
2
furnace gas is transferred off site, this corresponds to an emission factor of 1.35 kg CO per kg pig iron produced.
2
TABLE 4.1
TIER 1 DEFAULT CO 2 EMISSION FACTORS FOR COKE PRODUCTION AND IRON & STEEL PRODUCTION
Process Emission Factor Source
Sinter Production (tonne CO per Sinter Production: European IPPC Bureau (2001), Integrated Pollution
2
tonne sinter produced) 0.20 Prevention and Control (IPPC) Best Available Techniques Reference
Document on the Production of Iron and Steel, December 2001, Table
4.1, Page 29. http://eippcb.jrc.es/pages/FActivities.htm
Coke Oven (tonne CO per tonne Coke Production: European IPPC Bureau (2001), Integrated Pollution
2
coke produced) 0.56 Prevention and Control (IPPC) Best Available Techniques Reference
Document on the Production of Iron and Steel, December 2001, Table
6.2, Page 122. http://eippcb.jrc.es/pages/FActivities.htm
Iron Production (tonne CO per Iron Production: European IPPC Bureau (2001), Integrated Pollution
2
tonne pig iron produced) 1.35 Prevention and Control (IPPC) Best Available Techniques Reference
Document on the Production of Iron and Steel, December 2001, Tables
7.2 and 7.3. http://eippcb.jrc.es/pages/FActivities.htm
Direct Reduced Iron production Direct Reduced Iron Production: European IPPC Bureau (2001),
(tonne CO per tonne DRI Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control (IPPC) Best Available
2
produced) 0.70 Techniques Reference Document on the Production of Iron and Steel,
December 2001, Table 10.1 Page 322 and Table 10.4 Page 331.
http://eippcb.jrc.es/pages/FActivities.htm
Pellet production (tonne CO per Pellet Production: European IPPC Bureau (2001), Integrated Pollution
2
tonne pellet produced) 0.03 Prevention and Control (IPPC) Best Available Techniques Reference
Document on the Production of Iron and Steel, December 2001, Table
5.1 Page 95. http://eippcb.jrc.es/pages/FActivities.htm
Steelmaking Method
Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF) Steel Production: Consensus of experts and IISI Environmental
(tonne CO per tonne of steel 1.46 Performance Indicators 2003 STEEL
2
produced) (International Iron and Steel Institute, 2004)
Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) Steel Production: Consensus of experts and IISI Environmental
(tonne CO per tonne of steel 0.08 Performance Indicators 2003 STEEL
2
produced) ** (International Iron and Steel Institute, 2004)
Open Hearth Furnace (OHF) Steel Production: Consensus of experts and IISI Environmental
(tonne CO per tonne of steel 1.72 Performance Indicators 2003 STEEL
2
produced) (International Iron and Steel Institute, 2004)
Global Average Factor (65% Steel Production: Consensus of experts and IISI Environmental
BOF, 30% EAF, 5% OHF)* Performance Indicators 2003 STEEL
1.06
(tonne CO per tonne of steel (International Iron and Steel Institute, 2004)
2
produced)
* Factor based on 2003 international data where BOFs accounted for approximately 63 percent of world steel production and EAFs
approximately 33 percent; OHF production accounted for the remaining 4 percent but is declining.
** The emission factor for EAF steelmaking does not include emissions from iron production. The emission factors for BOF and OHF
steelmaking do include emissions from blast furnace iron production.
Note that the CO emission factor for EAF steelmaking in this table is based on production of steel from scrap metal, and therefore the
2
EAF emission factor does not account for any CO emissions from blast furnace iron making. The Tier 1 CO emission factor for EAFs in
2 2
this table is therefore not applicable to EAFs that use pig iron as a raw material.
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 4.25
=== PAGE 58 ===
Chapter 4: Metal Industry Emissions
4.5 MAGNESIUM PRODUCTION
4.5.1 Introduction
In the magnesium industry, there are a number of potential emission sources and gases. The amount and type of
emission from the magnesium industry will reflect the raw material used for primary magnesium metal
production and/or the type of cover gas mixture used in the casting and recycling foundries to prevent oxidation
of molten magnesium. It is good practice to consider, in a disaggregated way if possible, all segments of the
magnesium industry and their related emissions. A list of possible greenhouse gas emissions, which may be
associated with primary, and secondary magnesium metal production and casting operations, is provided in
Table 4.18.
Primary magnesium refers to metallic magnesium derived from mineral sources. Primary magnesium can be
produced either by electrolysis or a thermal reduction process. The raw materials used for primary magnesium
production are dolomite, magnesite, carnalite, serpentine, brines or seawater. Processing of carbonate raw
materials (magnesite and dolomite) will release CO during manufacturing. The CO is released during
2 2
calcination of carbonate-based ores (dolomite/magnesite) - a ‘pre-treatment’ step to the main electrolytic/thermal
reduction processes. This process is similar to the generation of CO in the mineral industry (see Chapter 2).
2
Secondary magnesium production includes the recovery and recycling of metallic magnesium from a variety of
magnesium containing scrap materials e.g., post consumer parts, machine cuttings, casting scraps, furnace
residues, etc. Magnesium casting processes may involve metal from both primary production and secondary
magnesium production. Magnesium casting processes involve handling of molten pure magnesium and/or
molten high magnesium content alloys. Molten magnesium (also understood to mean high magnesium content
alloys) maybe cast by a variety of methods including gravity casting, sand casting, die casting and others.
All molten magnesium spontaneously burns in the presence of atmospheric oxygen. Production and casting of all
magnesium metal requires a protection system to prevent burning. Among the various protection systems
commonly used are those that use gaseous components with high GWP values, such as SF , which typically
6
escape to the atmosphere. Metallic magnesium cast from the various processes and sources all require protection
methods and will therefore have similar potentials for GHG emissions.
TABLE 4. 18
POSSIBLE GHG EMISSIONS RELATED TO PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING OF MAGNESIUM
PROCESS POTENTIAL ASSOCIATED PROCESS GHG EMISSION
SF HFC’s CO Others*
6 2
Raw Materials Preparation for Primary Production
Dolomite/Magnesite Based - - X -
Other Raw Materials - - - -
Casting (primary & secondary)
Primary ingot casting X X X X
Die casting X X X X
Gravity casting X X X X
Other casting methods X X X X
Secondary Mg Production** X X X X
*Others include fluorinated ketone and various fluorinated decomposition products e.g., PFCs
** Includes processes involving the recycle/recovery of metallic magnesium
Secondary magnesium production (recycling), handling, melting, and casting, molten metal is protected against
oxidation throughout the process by using protection systems such as SF or SO containing cover gases (a
6 2
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 4.59
=== PAGE 64 ===
Chapter 4: Metal Industry Emissions
HFC-134a, FK 5-1-12 and decomposition products (e.g., PFCs)
As described in Section 4.5.1, the industrial use of fluorinated compounds other than SF for magnesium
6
oxidation protection commenced in 2003-2004. As such, the industrial experience in using these compounds for
magnesium protection purposes is yet very limited. Even individual plants will have little historic data, if any, on
actual emissions of these other fluorinated compounds from their operations. While there is a general sense in
industry that the volume use of these alternate gases will be less than SF , there are no data available at this time
6
on which to base emission factors. Hence, it is not possible at this time to develop an emission factor-based
approach (Tier 1 or 2) for reporting emissions.
However, if the GHG emission from the use of magnesium cover gases is a national key category, it is good
practice to collect direct measurements or meaningful indirect measurements of GHG emissions (fugitive
emissions of HFC134-a and FK 5-1-12 as well as emissions of PFCs as decomposition products) from
magnesium foundries using HFC-134a or FK 5-1-12 as cover gases. This is consistent with the Tier 3 approach.
Carrier gases
The contribution of carbon dioxide carrier gas used in protective cover gas systems is normally a small fraction
of the global warming potential. In general, these emissions may be disregarded.
4.5.2.2 CHOICE OF EMISSION FACTORS
CO EMISSIONS FROM PRIMARY PRODUCTION
2
Tier 1 – default emission factors
As previously mentioned, the Tier 1 method calculates emissions from default emission factors applied to a
country’s total primary magnesium production. The default emission factors (Table 4.19) take into account the
type of material used and basic stoichiometric ratios which have been adjusted by empirical data for generic
manufacturing process losses. The resulting emission of CO per tonne magnesium produced is considerably
2
higher than the theoretical volume described in the Section 4.5.1.
TABLE 4.19
EMISSION FACTORS FOR ORE-SPECIFIC PRIMARY Mg METAL PRODUCTION
Raw Material tonnes CO emission/tonne primary Mg produced
2
Dolomite 5.13
Magnesite 2.83
Tier 2 – country/company-specific emission factors
The Tier 2 method for estimating CO emissions from primary magnesium involves collecting company/plant-
2
specific empirical emission factors. The company specific emission factors may differ substantially from the
default emission factors depending on process materials handling. This collection should take place if the
emissions are a key category.
Tier 3 – direct measurement approach
If actual measured CO emissions data are available from individual primary magnesium facilities, these data
2
can be aggregated and used directly to account for national emissions.
MAGNESIUM CASTING PROCESSES (PRIMARY & SECONDARY)
SF
6
Tier 1 – default emission factors
The underlying assumption for the Tier 1 approach is that all SF consumption in this industry segment is
6
emitted, though. as described in Section 4.5.1, this assumption will potentially overestimate the GHG emissions.
The Tier 1 method also assumes no knowledge of type of magnesium handling- or casting operation (recycling,
billet casting or die-casting, etc.) Under recommended conditions for die-casting, the consumption rates are
about 1 kg SF per tonne magnesium produced or smelted (Gjestland and Magers, 1996). Although the SF
6 6
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 4.65