Does Pricing Carbon Mitigate Climate Change?
Firm-Level Evidence from the European Union

            Emissions Trading System*

  Jonathan Colmer                 Ralf Martin
University of Virginia    Imperial College London

                              World Bank (IFC)

     Mirabelle Muuˆls          Ulrich J. Wagner
Imperial College London   University of Mannheim
National Bank of Belgium

                                                   Abstract

    In theory, market-based regulatory instruments correct market failures at least cost. How-
ever, evidence on their efﬁcacy remains scarce. Using administrative data, we estimate that, on
average, the EU ETS – the world’s ﬁrst and largest market-based climate policy – induced reg-
ulated manufacturing ﬁrms to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 14-16% with no detectable
contractions in economic activity. We ﬁnd no evidence of outsourcing to unregulated ﬁrms or
markets; instead, ﬁrms made targeted investments, reducing the emissions intensity of produc-
tion. These results indicate that the EU ETS induced global emissions reductions, a necessary
and sufﬁcient condition for mitigating climate change. We show that the absence of any nega-
tive economic effects can be rationalized in a model where pricing the externality induces ﬁrms
to make ﬁxed-cost investments in energy-saving capital that reduce marginal variable costs.

    *This Version: January 2024. Correspondence: Mirabelle Muuˆls – Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ,
UK. Tel: +44 (0)20 7594 9059. m.muuls@imperial.ac.uk. We thank Bard Harstad for his comments and guidance, and
three anonymous referees whose suggestions have signiﬁcantly improved the paper. We are grateful to Michael Best,
Meredith Fowlie, Andreas Gerster, Michael Greenstone, Stephen Holland, Xavier Koch, Jakob Lehr, Mar Reguant,
Johannes Spinnewijn, and John Van Reenen for helpful thoughts and discussions. We are also grateful to seminar
participants at Harvard, Cambridge, ETH Zurich, Geneva, LSE, Mannheim, NYU Shanghai, Oxford, Toulouse, and
Waseda, as well as to conference participants at the NBER Summer Institute, TSE, IZA, EUI Florence School of
Regulation, and at several other conferences for helpful comments and suggestions. All the results have been reviewed
to ensure that no conﬁdential information has been disclosed (Centre d’acce`s se´curise´ distant aux donnees, CASD –
project E598). Funding by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) through grant no. ES/J006742/1, Cen-
tre for Climate Change Economics and Policy, the Grantham Foundation, the National Bank of Belgium, European
Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under grant agreements no. 308481 and no. 865181, the
German Research Foundation (DFG) through CRC TR 224 (Project B07), is gratefully acknowledged. This work is
also supported by a public grant overseen by the French National Research Agency (ANR) as part of the “Investisse-
ments d’Avenir” program (reference: ANR-10-EQPX-17 – Centre d’acce`s se´curise´ distant aux donne´s – CASD) All
errors and omissions are our own.
1 Introduction

The unchecked accumulation of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions is one of the starkest exam-
ples of market failure worldwide. GHG emissions are a by-product of valuable economic ac-
tivities. However, the costs they impose through climate change are not fully accounted for in
economic decision-making. In theory, market-based regulations hold the promise of mitigating
climate change at least cost to society (Pigou, 1920; Baumol & Oates, 1971; Baumol, 1972; Mont-
gomery, 1972; Tietenberg, 1973; Nordhaus, 1977; Hahn, 1989; Nordhaus, 2001; Burke et al., 2016;
Gillingham & Stock, 2018).1 These regulations discourage the production of emissions-intensive
goods by putting a price on emissions. The price encourages both emissions abatement, in partic-
ular by emitters with low abatement costs, and investments in technology that lowers abatement
costs.

    Market-based regulations allow polluting ﬁrms more ﬂexibility in choosing their own path to
compliance than command-and-control regulation, yet different compliance strategies have very
different implications for the economy and the global environment. Flexibility in how to com-
ply may lead to leakage effects that undermine climate change mitigation. If regulated ﬁrms cut
emissions by outsourcing carbon-intensive elements of the value chain, then carbon emissions will
simply ‘leak’ to unregulated jurisdictions or to unregulated ﬁrms or market segments within the
same jurisdiction. Carbon leakage threatens the efﬁcacy of any unilateral climate change mitiga-
tion policy by limiting, or even reversing, its impact on global emissions.

    This paper provides evidence on the environmental and economic consequences of market-
based regulations to mitigate climate change by evaluating the European Union Emissions Trading
Scheme (EU ETS) – the world’s ﬁrst and largest market-based climate policy. Introduced in 2005,
the EU ETS establishes a price for the right to emit carbon dioxide (CO2). This is achieved by
imposing a cap on the aggregate emissions from more than 12,000 power and manufacturing plants
in 31 countries. The cap covers 45% of EU emissions and 5% of global emissions. Tradeable
permits are then issued for each tonne of CO2 under the cap. The permit price is formed in a
European-wide market where ﬁrms with a permit surplus sell to ﬁrms that require permits in order
to comply with the regulation.

    Whether such a cap-and-trade scheme reduces emissions is a question of regulatory stringency
and the extent to which emissions are relocated to unregulated jurisdictions. That is, emissions

     1While there is plenty of disagreement among economists in discussions of policy and government intervention,
a preference for market-based regulatory instruments is a point on which economists largely agree. On January 17th
2019, over 3,500 economists, from a diverse set of political, ideological, and academic backgrounds, rallied around
the efﬁcacy of market-based mechanisms for internalizing the social costs of climate change in a statement published
in the Wall Street Journal – the largest public statement by economists in history. The second largest public statement
by economists was the “Economists’ Statement on Climate Change” signed by 2,500 economists in 1997 at the time
of the Kyoto Protocol, calling for market-based mechanisms to mitigate climate change.

                                                          1
within the regulated market must be lower than if the cap did not exist. In lieu of this unobserv-
able condition, economists view a high and stable permit price as a credible signal of regulatory
stringency. Figure 1 plots permit prices in the EU ETS during our study period. In Trading Phase
I (from 2005 until 2007), permit prices initially climbed to over e 30 but then fell by 50% in April
2006 when evidence came in that the cap was not binding. By the end of 2007, Phase-I permits
were essentially worthless. In contrast, Phase-II futures prices, which capture the expected strin-
gency of the cap for Trading Phase II (from 2008 until 2012) remained between 15 to 20 euro for
2006 and 2007, before rebounding to e 30 again in 2008. For the remainder of Phase II, however,
prices declined to between e 8 and e 15. Whether these prices were sufﬁcient to deliver mean-
ingful reductions in regulated emissions, and whether these reductions were offset by increases in
unregulated emissions, are empirical questions. We seek to answer these questions using compre-
hensive administrative data from the French manufacturing sector.

               Figure 1: EUA Permit Prices during Phase I and Phase II of the EU ETS

Notes: The ﬁgure reports daily average prices of EUA futures (e) between January 2005, the start of Phase I, and
December 2012, the end of Phase II. Reproduced from Ellerman et al. (2016) with gracious support by Aleksandar
Zaklan.

    Using a matched difference-in-differences research design, we estimate that the EU ETS in-
duced regulated ﬁrms to reduce CO2 emissions relative to unregulated ﬁrms by 14% during Trad-
ing Phase I and by 16% in Trading Phase II, with no detectable negative effects on economic
output or employment. We estimate no signiﬁcant effects prior to the announcement of the EU
ETS or during the announcement period. On aggregate, our results imply that CO2 emissions fell
by 5.4 million tonnes on average between 2005 and 2012, accounting for approximately 28-47%

                                                          2
of the aggregate reduction in industrial emissions during this period. We note that our estimates
capture the direct effects of the EU ETS on ﬁrm behavior and so likely reﬂect a lower bound on
the aggregate effects of the EU ETS. We do not identify any common ﬁrm responses to the EU
ETS through market-wide price increases in electricity or other carbon-intensive inputs (Fabra &
Reguant, 2014; Hintermann, 2016).

    We also provide evidence indicating that the EU ETS induced global emissions reductions,
which is the relevant outcome from the perspective of climate change mitigation. First, as noted,
we estimate no detectable negative effects on the economic performance of regulated ﬁrms. If we
found such effects, this could mean that the policy shifted production and emissions to unregulated
ﬁrms. Counter to this leakage mechanism, we estimate signiﬁcant reductions in the CO2 intensity
of value added, but no effect on value added or employment. Second, we ﬁnd no evidence that
ﬁrms increased imported inputs or the carbon content of inputs through trade. Nor do we estimate
increased substitution towards purchased electricity or a change in the composition of emissions.
These ﬁndings are inconsistent with carbon leakage being a ﬁrst-order driver of the estimated
emissions reductions in this context. Instead, we present evidence that investments in cleaner
production processes was the prevailing abatement mechanism among regulated ﬁrms.

    How could ﬁrms reduce emissions without any detectable contraction in economic activity
despite the fact that carbon pricing increases input costs? Under standard assumptions, a model
of ﬁrm production predicts contractions in economic activity alongside reductions in emissions
(possibly accompanied by decreasing effects on productivity, cf. Greenstone et al., 2012). Contrary
to this, we ﬁnd that ETS participation is associated with weakly positive effects on value added,
employment, investment, and productivity. One hypothesis is that the ETS induced ﬁrms to make
investments that increased productivity, offsetting the regulatory costs to the ﬁrm, which is also
consistent with the slight rebound in emissions, but not emissions intensity, that we observe during
the later years of Phase II. We present an augmented model of ﬁrm production, where ﬁrms have
the opportunity to switch to an alternative production technology, which requires a ﬁxed switching
cost, but also reduces marginal variable costs and weakly increases productivity. In the presence of
such a technology, it is no longer clear whether optimal abatement will require the ﬁrm to accept
higher marginal costs of production or to make a costly, once-and-for-all investment that prevents
increasing marginal costs afterwards. Many existing technologies (because they economize on
energy) could actually reduce marginal production costs, but their adoption is not always proﬁtable.
In our model, ﬁrms switch if the present discounted value of doing so exceeds the switching cost.
When carbon prices are low, no switching occurs. Compared to a counterfactual without carbon
pricing, this case gives rise to the standard prediction that reductions in emissions occur alongside
a contraction in ﬁrm production, as ﬁrms face higher marginal costs. At higher carbon prices,
switching occurs, leading to a reduction in emissions, and increase in measured capital. When

                                                          3
the “clean” production technology also raises total factor productivity (TFP), then value added,
employment, and measured TFP also increase. Our empirical results are most consistent with
the case in which ﬁrms pay ﬁxed up-front costs to switch into “clean” production technologies
that reduce the emissions intensity of production, reduce marginal variable costs, and increase
productivity, offsetting the direct costs of carbon pricing.

    The maximum permit price during the time of the estimated emissions reductions suggests
that marginal abatement costs could not have exceeded $53 per tonne of CO2 ($2017). This price
reﬂects the point where ﬁrms would have been indifferent between buying permits and reducing
emissions and so true marginal abatement costs were likely much lower. Nevertheless, this cost
compares favorably to the marginal abatement costs of many non-market based regulatory instru-
ments (Gillingham & Stock, 2018). To the degree that these insights generalize to other markets
and settings, our study highlights that market-based regulations can, in practice, be an effective
and economically reasonable tool for mitigating climate change.

    Our paper contributes to several literatures. First, we contribute to a literature exploring the ef-
fects of environmental regulation on ﬁrm behavior (Becker & Henderson, 2000; Greenstone, 2002;
Fowlie et al., 2012; Greenstone et al., 2012; Ryan, 2012; Walker, 2013; Martin et al., 2014a,b;
Fowlie et al., 2016; He et al., 2020). This literature typically focuses on the effects of policy on
either economic or environmental outcomes. We evaluate treatment effects on both types of ﬁrm-
level outcomes. We also provide detailed evidence on the mechanisms through which ﬁrms reduce
emissions. This is essential to understanding whether the policy was effective at achieving its
ultimate objective, which is to reduce global emissions. We also present a new framework for eval-
uating the economic consequences of environmental regulations on ﬁrm behavior. This framework
provides a helpful structure to discipline the interpretation of our empirical results, and provides
guidance for future research in this area.

    Second, we contribute to a growing empirical literature seeking to understand the effects of the
EU ETS itself (see Martin et al., 2016, for a more detailed review). Early studies in this area have
been at the country or sector level, which complicates causal inference due to confounding factors
(Ellerman & Feilhauer, 2008; Ellerman et al., 2010; Egenhofer et al., 2011; Andersen & Di Maria,
2011). Most relevant to our study is a strand of the literature that employs difference-in-differences
designs akin to Fowlie et al. (2012) in order to evaluate the impacts of the EU ETS on manufac-
turing ﬁrms.2 A robust ﬁnding across studies is the absence of detrimental effects on economic
performance, broadly deﬁned (Jaraite & Di Maria, 2016; Marin et al., 2018; Dechezlepreˆtre et al.,
2023; Lo¨schel et al., 2019; Klemetsen et al., 2020; Gerster et al., 2021). The available evidence on

     2Beyond manufacturing, researchers have estimated the impact of the EU ETS on power plants (Fabra & Reguant,
2014; Zaklan, 2023), on patenting (Calel & Dechezlepreˆtre, 2016), and on foreign direct investment (Koch & Basse
Mama, 2019; Borghesi et al., 2020).

                                                          4
industrial CO2 emissions is not conclusive, however, and results vary across countries and trading
phases. Speciﬁcally, emissions reductions were estimated for Norway (Klemetsen et al., 2020) but
not for Germany (Gerster et al., 2021) or Lithuania where CO2 intensity fell (Jaraite & Di Maria,
2016). The EU ETS was found to have no impact on CO2 intensity in the United Kingdom (Calel,
2020), though it may have reduced CO2 emissions in that country, according to a study of selected
emitters in four EU countries (Dechezlepreˆtre et al., 2023). The tightening of the EU ETS in
more recent years has come with improvements in the emission efﬁciency of the biggest emitters
(De Jonghe et al., 2020).

    These studies are valuable because they establish under which conditions the EU ETS induced
local reductions in emissions. The principal limitation in previous research is a lack of compelling
evidence on the mechanisms through which emissions reductions were delivered. Yet understand-
ing the mechanisms is crucial if we are to rule out the possibility that local emissions reductions
did not translate into global reductions, which is a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for mitigating
climate change. Our study ﬁlls this gap. Using linked administrative data from multiple sources,
we not only estimate the effects of the EU ETS on the emissions and economic performance of
ﬁrms, but we also identify how ﬁrms respond to comply with the regulation. In doing so, we pro-
vide the ﬁrst evidence in support of the proposition that the EU ETS, the most signiﬁcant climate
policy instrument to date, has delivered on its stated policy objective.

    Finally, we provide early empirical evidence that market-based mechanisms are a cost-effective
way of reducing emissions. In recent years there has been renewed interest in understanding which
government interventions are most effective at improving social welfare (Hendren & Sprung-
Keyser, 2020; Hendren & Finkelstein, 2020); however, evaluating the welfare effects of regula-
tions faces a number of theoretical and empirical challenges, given the need to weigh the beneﬁts
to society against the costs to ﬁrms and workers. Our ﬁndings indicate that the EU ETS delivered
global emissions reductions with no detectable economic contraction. Understanding the efﬁcacy
of government interventions is especially important in the context of mitigating climate change,
due to the severity of the problem and due to the limited resources available to tackle it. Through
the lens of our model, our ﬁndings suggest that the costs associated with decarbonization may
only be costly in the transition phase, rather than in the long term. We posit that the emissions
reductions induced by the EU ETS likely cost substantially less per tonne of CO2 than alternative
non-market-based regulatory instruments (Gillingham & Stock, 2018).3

    In the next section, we describe the design of the EU ETS and our empirical approach. Sec-

     3This conclusion only holds for the manufacturing sector considered here; a system-wide assessment of abatement
costs is beyond the scope of our study. Moreover, as noted by Vogt-Schilb & Hallegatte (2014), command-and-
control policies might deliver better results if emissions-reducing investments are subject to strong path dependencies,
requiring that expensive abatement investments be made before reaping low-hanging fruit. We thank two anonymous
referees for raising these caveats.

                                                          5
tion 3 describes the data used for analysis. Section 4 presents the main results and Section 5
explores the underlying mechanisms. Section D presents back-of-the-envelope calculations that
consider the contribution of the EU ETS to aggregate emissions reductions and compares the cost-
effectiveness of the EU ETS to other existing and proposed climate change mitigation policies.
Section 7 concludes.

2 Evaluating the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme

Identifying the causal effects of a real-world policy intervention is never a trivial exercise. In
the context of the EU ETS, two major challenges arise. First, accurate data on carbon emissions
prior to the implementation of the ETS is scarce, since most countries did not explicitly collect
this information before it was required for monitoring purposes.4 However, pre-implementation
data is necessary to establish that any measured change in the performance of regulated ﬁrms can
plausibly be ascribed to the policy itself, and not to other factors. With access to rich administrative
data on the fuel use of French manufacturing plants, we are able to construct a consistent, bottom-
up measure of direct emissions for all ﬁrms, including unregulated ones, both before and after the
implementation of the EU ETS. Each dataset, as well as the linkages, are explained in detail in
Section 3.

    Second, to evaluate the effects of any policy, it is important to have a credible counterfactual.
This is particularly challenging in the absence of experimental conditions in which subjects can
be randomly assigned to treatment and control groups. Correlation does not imply causation.
There are many reasons why emissions could have fallen since the implementation of the EU
ETS. Emissions in Europe have been declining for some time, as a result of structural economic
change and due to energy efﬁciency improvements. Furthermore, the Great Recession resulted
in a signiﬁcant drop in economic activity, which in turn likely contributed to at least temporary
declines in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the EU and around the world. These trends make
the evaluation of emissions trading systems at the aggregate level (i.e., country or sector) a futile
exercise, because it is not possible to disentangle the effects of policy changes from other changes
over time.

    It is only through the combination of temporal and cross-sectional variation in treatment assign-
ment among otherwise similar ﬁrms that one can hope to identify the causal effect of the EU ETS
on emissions and economic outcomes. The remainder of this section explains why the design of the
EU ETS gives rise to both types of variations and how the speciﬁc institutional details allow us to
identify and estimate the direct effects of the policy using variants of the difference-in-differences

     4Previous work on this policy has been largely unable to compare emissions before and after its introduction
Ellerman & Buchner (2008); Ellerman et al. (2010); Egenhofer et al. (2011); Andersen & Di Maria (2011).

                                                          6
estimator.

2.1 Treatment Assignment in the EU ETS

The EU ETS is a European-wide cap-and-trade program for CO2 emissions.5 Polluters regulated
under the policy are required to surrender, at the end of each year, one European Union Allowance
(EUA) for each tonne of CO2 equivalent they have emitted over the year. They may buy additional
EUAs or sell excess EUAs on an international market at a uniform price. Within limits, EUAs
can be banked or borrowed to balance needs across years and, since 2008, across trading phases.
The total amount of EUAs in the system is limited and linearly declines over time. Scarce EUAs
command a positive price in the permit market. The treatment effect we seek to identify is the
average effect of having to pay for CO2 emissions on various outcome variables of treated polluters.
Allocation of EUAs to polluters is via free allocation or permit auctions. During the study period of
this paper, free permit allocation to manufacturing ﬁrms was the rule. Our main analysis abstracts
from permit allocation for two reasons. First, by a Coasian argument, permit allocation should not
affect ﬁrm behavior at the margin. Second, we lack a credible strategy to test for a causal effect.

    Our identiﬁcation strategy exploits both temporal and cross-sectional variation in treatment as-
signment. The EU ETS was launched in 2005, when France and most other European countries did
not have CO2 prices in place. While this makes 2005 the ﬁrst year of actual regulatory treatment,
we allow for the possibility that polluters responded to the announcement of the policy before the
actual launch.6

    The EU ETS was ofﬁcially announced with the publication of the Emissions Trading Directive
in 2003 (Directive 2003/87/EC). However, the publication of the directive marked the culmination
of a multi-year consultation process between the EU Commission and stakeholders about key de-
sign features of the policy. The process was initiated with the publication of a green paper by the
EU Commission in 2000 (European Commission, 2000). Comments on the green paper submit-
ted by businesses, NGOs and governments were published in May 2001 (European Commission,
2001). At that point, actors likely had some clarity regarding the shape that the ETS would be
taking. We thus consider the year 2001 as the beginning of the announcement period.

    Cross-sectional variation in treatment assignment arises because not all CO2 emitters in Eu-
rope are regulated under the EU ETS. Participation criteria were ﬁrst spelled out in the Emissions
Trading Directive and then transposed into national laws.7 These criteria are targeted at industrial

     5Ellerman et al. (2016) provide a concise yet comprehensive review of the history and structure of the EU ETS.
     6Since CO2 intensities are often embodied in long-lived capital goods, such anticipated adjustments make eco-
nomic sense if they prevent a polluter from being locked into high CO2 intensities – and therefore, high compliance
costs – for decades to come.
     7To harmonize criteria across countries, as well as to include additional sectors, the directive was later amended
(Directive 2009/29/EC).

                                                          7
facilities at the sub-ﬁrm level, referred to in the directive as installations. Different criteria are de-
ﬁned for combustion activities on the one hand and other carbon intensive processes on the other
hand.

    Participation in the EU ETS is mandatory for combustion installations with a rated thermal
input of 20 megawatts (MW) or more. This concerns not only fossil-fuel ﬁred power plants, which
are not analyzed in this paper, but also industrial plants across a wide range of industries that
generate heat, steam or power on site. Additional industrial installations are included because
they specialize in carbon intensive processes and exceed speciﬁc capacity thresholds. Process-
based deﬁnitions target, among others pulp and paper mills, coke ovens, petroleum reﬁneries,
non-metallic mineral products (including the manufacture of glass, ceramics, and cement), and the
manufacture of basic metals.8 Indirect emissions, i.e. emissions from sources that are not owned
and not directly controlled by the ﬁrm, are not taken into account, nor are electricity imports.

    We match French ETS installations listed in the ofﬁcial trading registry to the manufacturing
establishments operating them (further detail is presented in Section 3.7). Any establishment iden-
tiﬁed in this way is considered as treated and referred to as an ETS plant. Likewise, a ﬁrm is
considered as treated and referred to as an ETS ﬁrm if it operates at least one ETS plant. We deﬁne
a time-invariant deﬁnition of exposure to the ETS based on whether a ﬁrm has ever operated at
least one ETS plant during the study period.

    The installation-centered, capacity-based participation rules used in the Emissions Trading Di-
rective induce variation in treatment status even among ﬁrms of similar size (Calel & Deche-
zlepreˆtre, 2016). To see this, consider the case of two ﬁrms that operate combustion installations.
Both ﬁrms have two plants and a total combustion capacity of 30 MW, but the distribution of
that capacity across plants gives rise to different treatment assignments. One of Firm 1’s plants is
treated because it has a rated thermal input of 25 MW, which is above the participation threshold.
The other plant has a rated thermal input of 5MW and is untreated. We deﬁne Firm 1 as treated
because one of its plants is regulated. Firm 2 is not regulated because it achieves the same total
capacity by operating two smaller plants with rated capacity of 15 MW each, which is below the
threshold. Similar cases arise for process-regulated activities due to the capacity-based approach
with sharp thresholds.

    If the capacity ratings of plants were known to us, we could identify the treatment effect in
a regression-discontinuity design. However, no such data are publicly available for France (and,
to the best of our knowledge, in any other European country). Nevertheless, we can take advan-
tage of the fact that the participation rules induce variation in treatment status across ﬁrms with
similar levels of CO2 emissions by using difference-in-differences approaches that have been suc-
cessfully used in the evaluation of other cap-and-trade schemes (Fowlie et al., 2012). To internalize

     8Beginning in 2012, emissions from other industries, such as aviation, have been included in the ETS as well.

                                                          8
spillovers that may arise between regulated and unregulated plants that belong to the same ﬁrm,
and to take advantage of a much larger set of ﬁrm-level outcome variables, we set out to identify
average treatment effects on the treated at the ﬁrm level.

    Table 1 presents within-sector differences in pre-treatment characteristics between ETS and
non-ETS ﬁrms in the year 2000. We see that there are large and signiﬁcant differences in emissions
and production between regulated and unregulated ﬁrms. While balance is not required to identify
the effects of the ETS using a difference-in-differences estimator, the parallel trends assumption is
more likely to hold when baseline differences between the treatment and control group are smaller.
The large gaps motivate the creation of a matched analysis sample, which we use in our main
analysis. We discuss the matching process below, but note that while some baseline differences
remain between treated and control ﬁrms they are notably smaller than in the unmatched sample
and statistically insigniﬁcant in many cases.

2.2 Matched Difference-in-Differences Approach

Having longitudinal ﬁrm data allows us to estimate counterfactual emissions in the absence of the
EU ETS and thereby tease apart the effect of the regulation. We use a semi-parametric difference-
in-differences approach, following Heckman et al. (1997, 1998):

αAmaTtcThed = E[Yit (1) − Yit (0)|Xi, ET Si = 1]                   (1)

=  1        (Yjt (1) − Yjt(0)) − ωjk(Xj, Xk) · (Ykt (0) − Ykt(0))

   N1 j∈I1                                       k∈I0

where I1 denotes the set of ETS ﬁrms, I0 the set of non-ETS ﬁrms, and N1 the number of par-
ticipating ﬁrms in the treatment group. The treated ﬁrms are indexed by j, the control ﬁrms are
indexed by k. The weight placed on a non-ETS ﬁrm when constructing the counterfactual estimate
for ETS ﬁrm j is ωjk. These weights can be calculated using any matching approach. The ratio-
nale behind matching is to improve covariate balance and to increase common support between
regulated and unregulated ﬁrms. Table 1 and Figures A.3-A.4 show that our matching approach,
while not perfect, substantially improves the balance and common support between regulated and
unregulated ﬁrms.

    In our baseline speciﬁcation, we implement this approach as a difference-in-differences regres-
sion on a matched sample obtained in a one-to-one nearest-neighbor matching. We calculate the
difference in average emissions for regulated ﬁrms, before and after the introduction of the EU ETS
and subtracting from this change the difference in average emissions from a matched unregulated

            9
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Regulated and Unregulated Firms

                           (1)              (2)    (3)         (4)

                            Pre-Match   Pre-Match  Pre-Match   Post-Match
                           Unregulated  Regulated  Difference  Difference

                           (Full Sample) (Full Sample) (Full Sample) (Matched Sample)

log (CO2)                  -0.043        3.715     3.758***    0.944***
log (Employment)           (1.757)      (1.527)     (0.100)     (0.157)
log (Value Added)
log (Capital Stock)         5.457        6.126     0.668***     0.135
log (CO2/VA)               (0.873)      (1.265)    (0.0808)    (0.0993)
log (Total Imports)
Gas Share                   9.242       10.295     1.053***     0.176
Electricity Bought Share   (1.047)      (1.361)    (0.0872)    (0.120)

                            9.449       11.233     1.784***    0.444***
                           (1.310)      (1.534)    (0.0987)     (0.152)

                            2.228        4.933     2.705***    0.768***
                           (1.636)      (1.395)    (0.0915)    (0.0936)

                           16.052       17.139     1.087***    -0.0114
                           (1.401)      (1.823)     (0.117)    (0.222)

                            0.638        0.702     0.0638***   -0.0647
                           (0.440)      (0.372)     (0.0244)   (0.0592)

                            0.516        0.263     -0.254***   -0.0375**
                           (0.247)      (0.188)     (0.0125)    (0.0171)

Observations in year 2000  3,949            252    4,201       298

# of Regulated Firms       0                252    252         149

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report the mean and standard deviation of each variable for unregulated
(control) and regulated (treatment) ﬁrms in the year 2000. Reported coefﬁcients in Columns 3 and 4
measure the difference in outcome variables between treatment and control ﬁrms in that year. Col-
umn 3 presents the average difference between unmatched treatment and control ﬁrms. Column 4
presents the average difference between matched treatment and control ﬁrms. Robust standard errors
reported in column 3. Two-way clustered standard errors (by ﬁrm and matching group) are reported
in column 4. Units (Logarithms of): CO2 – thousands of tonnes of CO2; Value Added – thousands
of euro; Employment – full-time equivalent employees; Capital – thousands of euro; CO2/VA units –
hundred thousands of tonnes of CO2 per euro of value added; Imports – euro; Gas Share – CO2 from
Gas/Total CO2; Electricity Bought Share – Purchased Electricity/Total Energy Consumed in tonnes
of oil equivalent. Purchased electricity is converted from MWh to tonnes of oil equivalent using the
conversion factor, tonnes of oil equivalent = MWh×0.086. Signiﬁcance levels are indicated as * 0.10,
** 0.05, *** 0.01.

                                        10
ﬁrm before and after the introduction of the EU ETS. The regression equation is given by

                                       4

(Yj,t − Yj,2000) − (Yk,t − Yk,2000) = βτ × 1{t ∈ Φτ } + εj,t                              (2)

                                       τ =1

where phases {Φτ }4τ=1 are deﬁned as,

Φ1 = {1996, . . . , 1999}              (Pre-Announcement Period),
Φ2 = {2001, . . . , 2004}              (Announcement Period),
Φ3 = {2005, . . . , 2007}              (Trading Phase I), and
Φ4 = {2008, . . . , 2012}              (Trading Phase II).

The left-hand side of equation (2) denotes the difference in outcome between treated ﬁrm j and
matched control ﬁrm k in year t, relative to that difference in the base year 2000; i.e., just before
the announcement of the EU ETS. The coefﬁcients of interest are βτ = αAmTatTched and provide the
effect of the EU ETS on regulated ﬁrms in period τ as compared to the matched control ﬁrms, and
relative to the year 2000.

Matching Variables We match non-ETS ﬁrms to ETS ﬁrms along a number of dimensions. For
each variable we match using data from the year 2000 (the year prior to the announcement of the
EU ETS). We match on the CO2 emissions, value added, employment, capital, emissions intensity,
total imports, share of gas in CO2 emissions, share of consumed energy that comes from purchased
electricity, number of plants in the ﬁrm, and the 2-digit NCE sector of the ﬁrm, which we re-deﬁne
to reﬂect the fact that multi-plant ﬁrms may engage in multiple activities.9 We match exactly on
sector to control for sector-speciﬁc shocks to the outcome variables that may have occurred after
the introduction of the EU ETS. Within a given sector we use a nearest neighbour using a maha-
lanobis distance across our matching variables. Our matching variables are chosen to identify a
set of comparison ﬁrms that are similar in terms of their environmental characteristics (emissions,
emissions intensity), their production function (value added, labor, and capital), the composition
of emissions and energy use (gas share and electricity share), and their exposure to trade (im-
ports). We do not match on pre-treatment trends in our baseline speciﬁcation . Instead, we let the
data speak to the validity of the assumption that pre-treatment trends in the outcome variables are

     9We deﬁne a new sector variable SUPERNCE at the ﬁrm level which is based on the combination of all plant-level
activities. For example, if a ﬁrm owns two plants and both produce in NCE 12, then the SUPERNCE is 12 and the ﬁrm
would be matched to a control ﬁrm in the same sector (with SUPERNCE 12). In contrast, for a ﬁrm with one plant
producing in NCE 12 and another one in NCE 17, we deﬁne SUPERNCE to be 1217 and match it to a control ﬁrm
within SUPERNCE 1217 (where the ordering of sectoral codes does not matter, e.g., SUPERNCE “1217” is equivalent
to SUPERNCE “1712”).

                                                         11
parallel. Column 4 of Table 1 shows that the post-match difference in baseline characteristics is
substantially smaller than the pre-match difference (column 3). While remaining statistically sig-
niﬁcant, the gap in emissions, capital, and emissions intensity is 75% smaller than the pre-match
difference. The gap in the share of energy consumed that comes from purchased electricity is 85%
smaller. There is no statistically signiﬁcant or economically meaningful post-match difference in
value added, employment, the composition of emissions, or imports.

Inference on Post-Matching Regression Coefﬁcients It has been argued that matching can be
seen as a pre-processing step to estimation and thus be ignored in the computation of standard
errors (Ho et al., 2007). However, Abadie & Spiess (2022) show that bias in the estimation of the
variance can occur if the covariates in the regression are correlated with the error term, conditional
on the variables that have been matched on. They demonstrate that valid inference can be con-
ducted if matching is done without replacement and standard errors are clustered at the level of the
match.

    Matching without replacement implies that a given control ﬁrm will only be used as a match in
a given year for one particular treated ﬁrm. This has the potential downside of introducing bias in
the asymptotic distribution of the post-matching regression estimator, especially when few suitable
controls are available relative to the number of treated units.

    By contrast, matching with replacement allows for a larger sample size because multiple treated
ﬁrms can be matched to the one control ﬁrm that best fulﬁlls the matching criteria. Given the bias–
variance trade-off, we give priority to minimizing bias and use matching with replacement in our
main speciﬁcation. Drawing inspiration from Abadie & Spiess (2022), we use a two-way cluster
adjustment to try to address bias in the estimation of the variance. The ﬁrst cluster is at the level
of the match (the ﬁrm) and also addresses serial correlation. The second cluster is at the control-
ﬁrm-year level to account for correlation across observations that are matched to the same control
observation. We propose that this additional adjustment addresses at least part of the concern
associated with the effects of matching with replacement on statistical inference. Our adjustment
collapses to the solution presented in Abadie & Spiess (2022) when each treatment ﬁrm is matched
to a unique control ﬁrm. In this case the second cluster becomes redundant. In Appendix B.2, we
show that our results are robust to using matching without replacement; however, the sample size
is smaller and balance between treatment and control ﬁrms is worse, consistent with the bias–
variance trade-off. As such, we prefer matching with replacement in our baseline speciﬁcation.
The similarity in statistical inference between matching without replacement following Abadie &
Spiess (2022) and matching with replacement, applying the two-way cluster adjustment, is en-
couraging. Inferences are unchanged if we two-way block bootstrap our standard errors. Standard
errors are notably smaller when we match with replacement and only cluster standard errors at the

                                                         12
ﬁrm–level, consistent with the insight from Abadie & Spiess (2022), which indicates that there is
value added to the two-way adjustment.

2.3 Identiﬁcation Assumptions

Our econometric approach assumes that the trajectory of regulated ﬁrms would have continued to
follow the trajectory of unregulated ﬁrms in the absence of the policy. We argue that this parallel
trends assumption is plausible when evaluating the effects of the EU ETS using pairs of similar
ﬁrms matched within narrowly deﬁned sectors. To make this argument, it is helpful to distinguish
between two potential violations of the parallel trends assumption. First, treated and control ﬁrms
could be on different trajectories already before the launch of the ETS. Second, other contempora-
neous shocks may differentially affect the trajectories of treated and control ﬁrms. Either violation
would lead to biased inferences about the effect of the ETS. While neither assumption is testable,
analysis can help to evaluate whether the violations are likely to be a ﬁrst-order concern. For exam-
ple, for observable characteristics, we should not see any differential trends between regulated and
unregulated ﬁrms prior to the introduction of the ETS. Concerns related to other shocks depend
on whether they coincided with the EU ETS and whether treated and control ﬁrms were affected
differently. Where possible, we engage in additional analyses to help increase the credibility of
our research design.

    Potential violations may arise from overlapping energy policies and economic ﬂuctuations that
occurred during the treatment period. The former include energy taxes, subsidies for renewable
energy, and energy efﬁciency targets. The latter prominently features the Great Recession, which
began in the ﬁrst year of the second trading phase. We engage seriously with the concern that
these policies and events may have affected regulated ﬁrms differently to matched control ﬁrms.
Relevant energy policies are reviewed in Appendix B.4 with a focus on whether they have different
implications for ETS and non-ETS ﬁrms, after matching. For policies that pre-dated the ETS, we
would expect divergent pre-trends if the policies had any differential effect on regulated ﬁrms. Any
confounding effect of subsidies for renewables should lead to a differential effect on electricity
generation. We do not ﬁnd any evidence of this.

    The Great Recession might confound estimated treatment effects in phase II of the ETS if the
economic downturn or the subsequent recovery had a differential effect on ﬁrms that have char-
acteristics associated with ETS participation. For example, the size differences in the unmatched
sample, highlighted in Table 1 above, could lead us to underestimate/overstate emissions reduc-
tions if untreated small ﬁrms were more/less affected during the Great Recession than the larger,
capital-intensive, ﬁrms that are treated. Matching on a broad set of covariates helps to reduce the
potential for this issue by minimizing differences in ﬁrm size, access to capital, scale economies

                                                         13
                           Figure 2: Trends in CO2 emissions by group of ﬁrms

Notes: The ﬁgure reports average trends in (log) CO2 emissions relative to the base year 2000 for various groupings
of ﬁrms in our dataset: All ETS ﬁrms, ETS ﬁrms for which we can ﬁnd a non ETS control ﬁrm (Matched ETS ﬁrms),
those control group ﬁrms (Matched Non-ETS) and ﬁrms that are not in the ETS nor the control group (Unmatched
Non-ETS).

and other potentially relevant differences, to the degree that they are captured by the observable
dimensions that we match on. To further explore the potential contribution of the Great Recession
we construct geographic and industry-level measures of exposure and explore the robustness of
our ﬁndings to accounting for these measures. Appendix B.3 discusses our estimation strategies
and shows that our results in Section 4 are robust to accounting for differential exposure to these
measures of the Great Recession.

    Further descriptive support for this conclusion is presented in Figure 2, which plots raw trends
in CO2 emissions, by treatment status, for matched and unmatched ﬁrms. While there is a clear fall
in emissions following the Great Recession in 2008, this drop appears to occur in a near-parallel
way for treated ﬁrms and matched control ﬁrms. In 2011 and 2012 we see more of an uptick in
emissions for regulated ﬁrms in the raw data, which would lead us to underestimate the effect of the
EU ETS if regulated ﬁrms were differentially affected during the recovery of the Great Recession.

    Figure 2 also provides more general support for the parallel trends assumption prior to the in-
troduction of the EU ETS in 2004. We see that the trajectory of emissions for matched non-ETS
ﬁrms follows ETS ﬁrms closely until 2005, when permit trading begins. At this point the emis-
sions of regulated ﬁrms drop sharply and remain lower throughout the post-treatment period. The
trajectory of emissions for unmatched non-ETS ﬁrms follows less closely prior to the introduction
of the policy, although even in the raw data the differences are not substantial, with deviations
concentrated in the announcement period between 2001 and 2004. The closer mapping between
matched non-ETS ﬁrms and ETS ﬁrms provides further support for the use of matched control

                                                         14
ﬁrms as a counterfactual for treated ﬁrms.
    In addition to the parallel trends assumption we must also assume that there are no spillovers

between regulated and unregulated ﬁrms. We internalize within-ﬁrm spillovers by estimating the
effects of the EU ETS at the ﬁrm-level. We cannot, however, rule out the potential for spillovers
between ﬁrms. Such spillovers may take the form of emissions leaking from regulated to unregu-
lated ﬁrms. We directly evaluate the potential for spillovers as part of our analysis, and ﬁnd little
evidence to suggest that they are of ﬁrst-order concern in this context.

3 Data

This section details the different data used in our analysis. We compile a dataset of French man-
ufacturing ﬁrms for each year between 1996 and 2012. This period covers several years prior to
the announcement of the EU ETS, the announcement phase between 2001 and 2004, and Trading
Phases I and II. The data are obtained from various sources.10

3.1 Energy and Emissions Data

We obtain detailed fuel use data from the Annual Survey of Industrial Energy Consumption (EA-
CEI), a survey conducted annually by the French National Institute of Statistics and Economic
Studies (INSEE).11

    The survey provides quantities and values of energy consumed by fuel type – broadly speaking,
electricity, steam, fossil fuels and biofuels.12 Other variables available in the survey include the
geographical location of each establishment and their sectoral NCE 2-digit classiﬁcation. The NCE
is the designated French statistical nomenclature of activity for the study of energy production and
consumption.13

    Having reliable data on CO2 emissions is of central importance to our study. We calculate

    10Firm- and plant-level data from the French Statistical Ofﬁce used in this paper were provided for research pur-
poses by authorization of the Comite´ du Secret Statistique, reference E598.

    11EACEI is the French acronym for Enqueˆte annuelle sur les consommations d’e´nergie dans l’industrie. INSEE
stands for Institut National de la Statistique et des E´tudes E´conomiques. Until 2007, the survey was carried out by the
statistical service of the Ministry of Industry, SESSI – Service d’E´tudes et Statistiques de l’Industrie.

    12Information for the following fuel types is requested from the surveyed ﬁrms: electricity (bought, auto-produced
– from thermal or non-thermal process – and resold), steam, natural gas, other types of gas available on the network,
coal, lignite, coke, butane, propane, heavy fuel oil, heating oil, other petroleum products, the black liquor (a byproduct
of the chemical decomposition of wood for making paper pulp), wood and its by-products, special renewable fuels,
special non-renewable fuels.

    13The NCE is the French acronym for the Nomenclature d’activite´s e´conomiques pour l’e´tude des livraisons
et Consommations d’E´nergie and can be put in correspondence with the French NACE rev.2-equivalent NAF
classiﬁcation. https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/fichier/3364874/irecoeacei16_
correspondance_NCE_NAF-1.pdf

                                                         15
emissions for both treated and untreated ﬁrms using the detailed energy consumption data from
the EACEI in conjunction with standardized conversion factors provided by the French Environ-
ment & Energy Management Agency (ADEME).14 Consequently, a ﬁrm will only be in our core
dataset if it reports detailed energy consumption data under the EACEI, as detailed further in Sec-
tion 3.7 and Appendix A.1. The sampling frame for the EACEI includes all French manufacturing
establishments.15 The response rate is close to 90 percent. This speaks to the high representa-
tiveness of the data, but it is important to note that not all establishments are covered, and that
sampling rules have changed over time. In 2000, the survey covers 88% of industrial emissions in
France.

    Slightly different sampling weights were applied before and after 2007, but the industrial cov-
erage remained constant, including all manufacturing except the sectors of energy production,
agri-food and sawmills. Around 12,000 establishments are drawn for the sample each year and it
includes (i) all industrial establishments with 20 employees or more in the most energy consuming
sectors;16 (ii) all establishments with more than ten employees in the Manufacturing of industrial
gases sector; (iii) all establishments with more than 250 employees on the 31st of December of that
year; (iv) a random sample of establishments with employment between 20 and 249 employees in
sectors that are not energy intensive.

    While the subsequent analysis is not based on the universe of French manufacturing ﬁrms, it
draws on a database designed to provide a representative sample, especially of the most energy
intensive ﬁrms in French manufacturing, while living up to the high standards of data collection
for ofﬁcial statistics in France.

3.2 Financial Data

The employment and ﬁnancial variables are obtained from French ﬁscal data. Tax returns ﬁled
by ﬁrms with the French Ministry for the Economy and Finance are collected in the annual ﬁscal
census of manufacturing, mining and utilities ﬁrms. Until 2007, this census was called the Uniﬁed
Corporate Statistics System and the resulting dataset we exploit is drawn from the database cover-
ing the years 1994–2007.17 For the years 2008–2012, the successor system is called ESANE with

    14ADEME is the French acronym for Agence de l’Environnement et de la Maˆıtrise de l’E´nergie. EU ETS partici-
pants in France are required to use the ADEME’s conversion factors when reporting their emissions.

    15The level of survey is the establishment rather than the enterprise given that energy consuming materials, elec-
tricity, gas meters and fuel tanks are held at that level.

    16Manufacture of bricks, tiles and construction products, in baked clay; Manufacture of cement; Manufacture of
lime and plaster

    17SUSE is the French acronym for Systeme Uniﬁe´ de Statistique d’Entreprises. FICUS stands for Fichier Complet
Uniﬁe´ de SUSE.

                                                         16
the resulting dataset FARE.18 These datasets provide general information about the ﬁrm (identi-
ﬁer, industry classiﬁcation, head ofﬁce address, total number of workers employed, age, etc.), the
income statement (containing variables such as total turnover, total labor costs and value added)
as well as balance sheet information (e.g., various measures of capital, debt and assets).19 As a
measure of capital, we use the value of gross ﬁxed tangible assets, which includes machinery,
equipment and buildings.

3.3 Imports Data

Firm-level data on imports for 1995–2012 are obtained from French Customs (DGDDI).20 The raw
data are based on the customs declaration forms that ﬁrms are required to submit, and provide a
comprehensive annual record of the value and quantity of exports and imports by destination or
origin country at the eight-digit product (CN8) level. The customs dataset has been used previously
in the trade literature (Eaton et al., 2011; Mayer et al., 2014). It includes the universe of trade ﬂows
from and to French ﬁrms, although reporting thresholds exist for compulsory declarations inside
and outside the European Union. Outside the EU, imports are only reported if their annual total
is above C1,000 or 1,000 kg. Within the EU, these thresholds vary over time and by trade ﬂow
(imports vs. exports) (Bergounhon et al., 2018). To harmonize across different thresholds, we set
import levels to the highest threshold in the ETS years; i.e., C2.3 millions. Since all ETS ﬁrms
were importers in the reference year 2000, we drop untreated ﬁrms that do not import any goods
in that year, to increase the comparability of regulated and unregulated ﬁrms.

3.4 Approximating the Carbon Intensity of Imports

To measure the carbon intensity of imports, we adopt the data and approach taken by the European
Commission when establishing whether a sector is at risk of carbon leakage.21 Following this
approach, the carbon intensity of a sector is measured as the percentage share of carbon permit
costs in value added. Carbon permit costs are calculated as the sum of indirect and direct carbon
emissions multiplied by a ﬁxed price of C30/tCO2. This proxy for costs is then divided by the
gross value added of a sector.

    For each ﬁrm and year in our dataset, we use correspondence tables between NACE rev1.1 and

    18ESANE stands for Elaboration des Statistiques Annuelles d’Entreprises and FARE stands for Fichier Approche´
des Re´sultats d’ESANE.

    19Only observations with non-missing values for employment, value added, emissions and capital are retained.
    20DGDDI stands for Direction Ge´ne´rale des Douanes et Droits Indirects.
    21Cf. in the Commission Decision 2010/2/EU, pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and
of the Council, the list of sectors and subsectors at the NACE rev1.1 four-digit level which were deemed to be exposed
to a signiﬁcant risk of carbon leakage (2010) OJ L 1/10.

                                                         17
CN8 product codes from Eurostat’s Reference and Management of Nomenclatures22 to obtain the
value of imports of goods from a given sector. Multiplying these values with the sector’s carbon
intensity and aggregating across sectors provides a carbon-weighted measure of a ﬁrm’s imports
value, reﬂecting the carbon intensity of its imports.

3.5 Environmental Protection Investments Data

For a subset of ﬁrms, we obtain detailed data on investments for mitigating carbon emissions and
air pollution. This dataset is also collected by INSEE as part of the Annual Survey on Environmen-
tal Protection Studies and Investments (Antipol).23 The sampling frame includes establishments
from sections B, C and D of the NAF rev.2 classiﬁcation, extending to some divisions of section
E since 2012. Different sampling weights were applied to draw about 11,000 units. The response
rate is above 80%.

    The variables used here all relate to investment aimed at reducing air pollution, broadly deﬁned.
They are split between (a) investments made to “measure” air and GHG pollution, (b) “integrated”
investments made in production processes and machines that are less carbon- or air pollution-
intensive than alternatives, and (c) “speciﬁc” investments made solely to limit and prevent air
pollution and GHG emissions; e.g., a ﬁlter. All investments are reported in thousands of euro. In
estimating (b), the “integrated” investment, respondents are asked to report the additional cost of
an investment that is relevant for protecting the environment. For example, they would report the
difference in the price of a new machine relative to that of an alternative that is more emissions-
intensive. In addition, they report the share of total integrated environmental investments that are
dedicated to air and climate pollution.

    Data about investments deﬁned as (a) are available from 1996 onwards. However, investments
deﬁned as (b) or (c) were only included in the survey from 2001. This means that for those
two categories, we can only explore changes in investment relative to 2001. Given the frequent
occurrence of zero values in the dataset, we apply an inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformation
rather than a logarithmic transformation, arcsinh yit = ln yit + yi2t + 1 . This is approximately
equal to log(2yit), except for very small values, and so can be interpreted in the same way as a
logarithmic transformation. However, unlike the logarithmic transformation, the IHS of zero is
well deﬁned.

    22This can be accessed at: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ramon
    23In French: Enqueˆte sur les investissements et les de´penses courantes pour prote´ger l’environnement. See Ap-
pendix C.1 for more information.

                                                         18
3.6 EU Transaction Log Data

The European Union Transaction Log (EUTL) is the ofﬁcial registry of the EU ETS. It provides
a list of all regulated installations, past and present.24 A pollution right in the EU ETS is called a
European Union Allowance (EUA). Each EU ETS installation has an “operator holding account”
in its national registry, into which its own allowances are issued. Any individual or organization
wishing to participate in the market is able to open their own “person holding account” in any
of the registries. The internet portal of the EUTL makes publicly available contact details for
each account, the number of allowances allocated under the “national allocation plan”, and the
compliance position of each installation, which is calculated as the net balance of surrendered
EUAs and veriﬁed emissions. This information is provided at the annual level. We combine it with
the data described above to identify regulated ﬁrms.

3.7 Analysis Sample and Descriptive Statistics

The quality of the link between entities across datasets is an important determinant of the ﬁnal sam-
ple in our empirical analysis. Linking the EACEI, FICUS/FARE, trade data and Antipol is straight-
forward since all four datasets use unique identiﬁers for ﬁrms (SIREN) and plants (SIRET).25 As
described in Appendix A, linking the EACEI to FICUS/FARE and trade data leads to a sample
of 4,201 ﬁrms emitting a total of 61.4 million tonnes of CO2 in 2000, which represents 79.3% of
aggregate industrial emissions from combustion of fossil fuels in France. Not all ﬁrms from our
main dataset are surveyed in Antipol.

    While the business dataset is maintained by INSEE, the French national registry of the EUTL is
managed by Caisse des De´poˆts. The latter institution provides a link between the permit identiﬁer
(GIDIC) from the national registry and the SIREN identiﬁer from INSEE, allowing for the linking
of the EUTL data to the business data. Out of the 4,201 ﬁrms, 252 are part of the EU ETS.
The main variables are summarized in Appendix Table B.1. Appendix Figure A.1 provides a
visual summary of all the steps involved in the construction of the ﬁnal sample from the raw
data. Comparing emissions computed on the basis of the EACEI to those reported in the EUTL
conﬁrms their consistency. Appendix A.1 illustrates the 0.96 correlation between these measures.
We graphically represent this relationship using a QQ plot (Figure A.2).

    We reiterate that the policy is not randomly assigned across ﬁrms. On average, ETS ﬁrms are

    24When the EU ETS was established in 2005, each member state created its own national registry containing
allowance accounts for each plant and other market participants. These registries interlinked with the Community
Independent Transaction Log (CITL), operated by the Commission, which records and checks every transaction. Since
2012, the EU ETS registry has been operated in a centralized fashion as the EUTL.

    25SIREN is the French acronym for Syste`me d’Identiﬁcation du Re´pertoire des Entreprises. To be precise, plants in
the EACEI and Antipol are identiﬁed by a SIRET (Syste`me d’Identiﬁcation du Re´pertoire des Etablissements) number.
The SIREN number corresponds to the ﬁrst nine digits of the SIRET number.

                                                         19
larger than non-ETS ﬁrms in terms of employment, value added, capital and imports (cf. Table
1). ETS ﬁrms also emit more CO2 emissions and are more carbon intensive. These differences
motivate the matching approach discussed in section 2.1, which substantially reduces baseline
differences.

4 Results

4.1 Main Outcomes

Table 2 presents our main results. We estimate that, on average, regulated ﬁrms reduced emissions
by 14% (p < 0.05) during Trading Phase I and by 16.3% (p < 0.05) during Trading Phase II. We
fail to reject the null hypothesis that the EU ETS had no effect on the economic performance of
ﬁrms, as measured by value added or the number of employees. With lower conﬁdence than the
emissions results, we estimate that regulated ﬁrms increased capital investments during Trading
Phase I (8.3%, p < 0.1) and Trading Phase II (10.5%, p < 0.1). Finally, we estimate, consistent
with the absence of any economic contraction, that regulated ﬁrms reduced the emissions intensity
of value added during Trading Phase II (-17.4%, p < 0.01). We estimate a 10% reduction in the
emissions intensity of output in Phase I but it is not statistically signiﬁcant at conventional levels.
We do not estimate any differential effects between the announcement and implementation of the
EU ETS.26

    As previously discussed, a key assumption that is required for us to interpret these effects as
causal is that regulated ﬁrms would have followed the same trajectory as unregulated ﬁrms in the
absence of the policy – the parallel trends assumption. The raw data presented in Figure 2 provides
initial support for this assumption. In further support of the parallel trends assumption, we do not
estimate any statistically or economically meaningful differences between regulated and unregu-
lated ﬁrms prior to the announcement or implementation of the EU ETS. Figure 3 presents a visual
representation of these ﬁndings. However, we know that there are limitations to evaluating parallel
trends based on pre-treatment differences (Freyaldenhoven et al., 2019; Roth, 2022; Rambachan
& Roth, 2023). Following Rambachan & Roth (2023) we engage in sensitivity analysis. Instead
of imposing that the parallel trends assumption holds exactly, we bound how large post-treatment
violations of parallel trends could be before inference “breaks down”. This is formalized by im-
posing that the post-treatment violation of parallel trends be no more than a constant, M¯ , larger
than the maximum violation of parallel trends in the pre-treatment period. A value of M¯ = 1, for
example, imposes that the post-treatment violation of parallel trends be no larger than the worst

    26For the remainder of our results we present average pre-ETS effects in our results tables. We continue to sepa-
rately present pre-announcement period and announcement period estimates in robustness tests and sensitivity analysis.

                                                         20
pre-treatment violation of parallel trends (accounting for statistical and identiﬁcation uncertainty
in our event-study estimates).27 For the estimated reduction in emissions, estimated breakdown
values are M¯ = 1.7 for 2007 and 1.3 for 2008.28 Consequently, our conclusion of a signiﬁcant
reduction in emissions depends on whether we are willing to assume that post-treatment violations
of parallel trends be no more than 1.3 times as large as the maximal pre-treatment violation. Based
on our pre-treatment estimates, differential reductions in emissions from other shocks can account
for up to 46% of the estimated effect before our inference starts to “break down”. We explore
the potential for such violations in the following section. While we cannot rule out violations of
parallel trends, these sensitivity tests make clear what must be assumed in order to draw causal
inferences. Figure 3 also provides an opportunity to explore dynamics. We estimate an immediate
reduction in emissions following the implementation of the ETS in 2005, with the largest reduction
in emissions occurring towards the end of Phase I and the start of Phase II. We estimate a slight
reversal of emissions in 2006, which may have arisen due to increased uncertainty about the future
stringency of the ETS when it was discovered in April 2006 that the cap was no longer binding for
Phase I; i.e., ﬁrms had sufﬁcient permits to remain compliant. This news initially depressed Phase
II futures prices (Figure 1) and, speculatively, could have delayed some investments until 2007
when prices rebounded. While emissions remained meaningfully below pre-implementation levels
throughout Phase II, the reductions appear to attenuate over time. In our discussion of mechanisms
below, we present a model to reconcile our full set of results. In the model ﬁrms have the option
of staying with their current technology and paying higher marginal variable costs, resulting in a
contraction, or paying an up-front ﬁxed cost in emissions-saving investments that in turn reduces
marginal variable costs. Consistent with technology switching we observe an initial contraction
in Phase I, coinciding with the increase in capital investments, followed by a relative expansion
in economic activity. While this relative expansion may have attenuated emissions reductions to-
wards the end of Phase II, we estimate persistent reduction in the emissions intensity of value
added across both phases.

4.2 Robustness Tests

Our main results are robust to a broad range of alternative speciﬁcations and robustness tests. We
summarize those ﬁndings here and refer the reader to Appendix B for the full set of results.

    Table B.4 shows that our results are robust to including fewer matching controls (column 2), to

    27An alternative framing is to say that post-treatment violations of parallel trends cannot deviate “too much” from a
linear extrapolation of the pre-trend; i.e., the slope of the pre-trend cannot change by more than “M” across consecutive
periods. Imposing a smoothness restriction of M = 0 would imply that the counterfactual difference in trends is
exactly linear. Larger values of M , by contrast, allow for more non-linear deviations from the pre-trend.

    28Estimates for the other post-treatment years are not statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level and so the original
95% conﬁdence already includes zero.

                                                         21
Figure 3: The Effect of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme on the Environmental and Economic
Performance of Firms

(a) CO2 Emissions  (b) Carbon Intensity

(c) Value Added    (d) Employment

                                                      (e) Capital Stock
Notes: These ﬁgures present estimates from OLS regressions, estimated on a matched sample. Standard errors are
clustered in two ways, at the ﬁrm-level and at the matching group level. All variables are in logs and normalized at
the year 2000. Vertical red lines relate to the different phases of the EU ETS. The EU ETS was announced in 2000
and the ﬁrst phase began in 2005. Phase II of the EU ETS began in 2008. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the
ﬁrm and match group level.

                                                         22
Table 2: The Effect of the EU ETS on the Environmental and Economic Performance of Firms

                     (1)       (2)          (3)      (4)      (5)

                     ∆ log(CO2) ∆ log(Value Added) ∆ log(Emp.) ∆ log(Capital) ∆ log(CO2/VA)

Pre-Announcement      0.028     0.009        0.002   -0.012    0.022
                     (0.021)   (0.039)      (0.025)  (0.025)  (0.037)

Announcement Period   0.014     0.014       -0.002    0.014    0.013
                     (0.025)   (0.040)      (0.019)  (0.021)  (0.034)

Trading Phase I      -0.140**  -0.050       -0.002   0.083*   -0.099
                      (0.057)  (0.085)      (0.036)  (0.046)  (0.068)

Trading Phase II     -0.163**   0.097        0.046   0.105*   -0.174**
                      (0.075)  (0.079)      (0.050)  (0.060)   (0.075)

Mean in 2000         82.107    55.600       684.215  132.919  3.398
Observations         2,348     2,348         2,348    2,348   2,348

Notes: This table presents estimates from OLS regressions, estimated on a matched sample. Standard errors are
clustered in two ways, at the ﬁrm-level and at the matching group level. Each estimate reﬂects the difference between
regulated ﬁrm and unregulated ﬁrm outcomes relative to the year 2000. We present estimates for four time periods:
prior to the announcement of the EU ETS, during the announcement period and during Phase I and Phase II of the EU
ETS. Means are reported for ETS ﬁrms in 2000. Units: CO2 – thousands of tonnes of CO2; Value Added – millions
of euro; Employment – full-time equivalent employees; Capital – millions of euro; CO2/VA units – thousands of
tonnes of CO2 per euro of value added. Signiﬁcance levels are indicated as * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.

matching without replacement (column 3), to increasing the number of nearest neighbors (columns
4–7), to imposing common support on emissions (column 8) and to matching on covariates for all
pre-treatment years between 1996 and 2000 (column 9). Table B.5 presents post-match baseline
differences between treatment and control ﬁrms for each matching speciﬁcation. Compared to our
baseline speciﬁcation, only imposing common support on emissions (column 8) results in smaller
differences. In Table B.6 we impose increasingly stringent caliper restrictions on the matching
distance between treatment and control ﬁrms. Our results remain statistically signiﬁcant until we
drop more than 10% of the treated ﬁrms with the largest difference; however, even when we drop
25% of treated ﬁrms the results remain qualitatively robust. In column (6) we use the cardinality
matching algorithm introduced by Zubizarreta et al. (2014). We present it alongside the caliper re-
strictions because it restricts the data to a sample of matched treatment ﬁrms where the differences
in matched covariates are no larger than 0.05. As can be seen in Table B.7 this results in balance
between treatment and control ﬁrms, but delivers a sample of ﬁrms that is almost half the size of
our baseline speciﬁcation sample. We do not estimate any statistically signiﬁcant effects, although
the estimated emissions reductions in Phase I remain qualitatively robust.

    More substantive concerns relate to the potential for overlapping policies and events that could
differentially affect regulated ﬁrms, confounding our interpretation. The absence of any effects

                                        23
on economic performance helps to mitigate the concern that the estimated effects might be con-
founded by differential reactions to the Great Recession between treated and control groups. If
this were the case, we would expect to see differential responses in economic outcomes as well as
environmental outcomes. It is possible that the Great Recession had a differential negative effect
on non-ETS ﬁrms, offsetting any negative effects of the ETS on regulated ﬁrms. In this case, our
estimated reductions in emissions would represent a lower bound on the effect of the ETS during
the Phase II trading period.

    A more direct way of assessing confounding effects of the Great Recession is by directly con-
trolling for its effects in the regression. In Appendix B.3, we show that this is possible in a straight-
forward modiﬁcation to the estimation framework. The intuition behind our approach is that if the
recession shocks of treated and matched controls are observed and included in the regression, they
can no longer confound the estimated ETS coefﬁcient. While ﬁrm-speciﬁc recession shocks are
unobserved, we can proxy for them using suitable spatial and sectoral measures of unemployment
changes between 2008 and 2009. We include these variables separately for treated and control
ﬁrms when re-estimating our main results. Table B.8 shows that the inclusion of these variables
has no effect on our Phase I treatment effect as should be expected. In Phase II the coefﬁcient is
slightly attenuated from -16.3% in our main results to -14.5%. These results lend further credibil-
ity to our identifying assumption that the Great Recession did not have differential effects on ETS
ﬁrms.

    A second concern is that other policies may confound the interpretation of our estimates. The
EU ETS was not implemented in isolation but in a policy context marked by a commitment by the
EU to reduce emissions, with the signing of the Kyoto Protocol in 1997. Under the EU Burden-
Sharing Agreement, France was called upon to implement policies in addition to the EU ETS
to contribute its fair share to the EU-wide abatement target. Such overlapping policies included
energy taxes, subsidies for renewable energy, and the promotion of energy efﬁciency.

    Appendix B.4 provides more detail on these policies and explains how differences in the timing
of when policies were introduced compared to the EU ETS can be exploited to draw inferences
about their empirical contribution to our results. For example, we show that feed-in tariffs for
electricity from renewable and small co-generation plants did not affect ﬁrms differentially. We
conclude that overlapping energy and climate policies in France were unlikely to drive the sizable
and robust emissions reductions we estimate in Table 2.

    Beyond the Great Recession and introduction of other energy policies, our study spans a time
when France is going through a broader process of de-industrialization. Firm exit may have con-
tributed to secular declines in CO2 emissions. Due to data limitations, we are unable to directly
evaluate ﬁrm exit. We therefore abstract from ﬁrm exit and analyze a balanced sample of ﬁrms
observed in each one of the four periods. To the degree that the EU ETS induced ﬁrms to exit our

                                                         24
sample before Phase II, our estimated emissions reductions represent a lower bound of the total
effect of the EU ETS on industrial emissions. In Appendix B.5, however, we provide evidence that
there is no differential attrition by ETS ﬁrms when constructing our balanced sample.

5 Mechanisms

Our ﬁndings indicate that the EU ETS induced regulated ﬁrms to reduce emissions with no de-
tectable effects on economic performance, leading to a reduction in the emissions intensity of
production. In this section, we investigate the mechanisms that drive these results.

5.1 Leakage

While we estimate that the ETS is associated with reductions in the emissions of regulated ﬁrms,
what matters for climate change mitigation is whether the ETS reduced global emissions. Regu-
lated ﬁrms may have cut emissions by outsourcing carbon-intensive elements of the value chain
to unregulated ﬁrms or markets. Carbon leakage threatens the efﬁcacy of the ETS by limiting, or
even reversing, the effect on global emissions. For example, if the emissions intensity of produc-
tion in upstream facilities is higher than in regulated facilities, global emissions could increase as
a consequence of the policy.

    To assess the efﬁcacy of the EU ETS as a climate policy instrument, it is therefore impor-
tant to understand whether the CO2 abatement we have estimated represents a global reduction in
emissions.

    Carbon leakage could occur through multiple channels. Three of them are particularly relevant
in the context of our study. The ﬁrst channel is via the supply chain, i.e., by out-sourcing more
intermediate products from unregulated ﬁrms. Such a strategy could save on compliance costs,
particularly if applied to the most carbon-intensive steps of the value chain, but it would inevitably
reduce the ﬁrm’s value added (deﬁned as “revenue minus material inputs”, where material inputs
are sourced both domestically and through international trade). We do not estimate any such
reduction. Moreover, regression results reported in columns 1 and 2 of Table 3 show that there is
no statistically signiﬁcant association between the EU ETS and the importing behavior of regulated
ﬁrms; however, the coefﬁcient on total imports in Phase II would imply a 4.5% increase in imports
if taken at face value.

    We bound the potential contribution of imports to our reduction in emissions by combining
a naive estimate of the elasticity between emissions intensity and imports, -0.097, with an upper
bound of the increase in total imports (18.6%).29 We calculate that increased imports in Phase II

    29The elasticity between emissions intensity and imports is estimated using a bivariate OLS regression of the form

                                                         25
could account for at most a 1.8% reduction in emissions intensity, accounting for at most 10% of
the estimate in Trading Phase II. Our collective ﬁndings on value added and imports, alongside
back-of-the-envelope calculations, provide little evidence to indicate that out-sourcing is likely to
be a major driver of our estimated emissions reductions.

    The second potential channel of carbon leakage is via the product market. Because carbon
pricing increases production costs at regulated ﬁrms, market forces might shift production to un-
regulated ﬁrms within France or abroad. If this process was driving the negative effect we estimate
for emissions, we would expect to also see negative effects of the EU ETS on at least one economic
variable, such as value added, employment or investment. Instead, however, we estimate insignif-
icant effects on employment and value added, and positive effects on capital investment. Apart
from mitigating concerns about leakage, this result is useful as a an indirect test of whether treat-
ment spillovers, which could pose a threat to our identiﬁcation strategy, are empirically relevant in
this context. Product-market leakage is isomorphic to a treatment spillover between regulated and
unregulated ﬁrms that reallocates market share from regulated to unregulated ﬁrms. This would
violate SUTVA and lead to an overstatement of the treatment effect as emissions fall at regulated
ﬁrms and increase at unregulated ﬁrms, in lock-step with production. The same effect should also
be observed for other variables relating to the scale of production. We ﬁnd no evidence that this is
the case. We only estimate reductions in emissions.

    A third possible channel of leakage arises if ﬁrms operating multiple facilities reallocate pro-
duction from regulated to unregulated ones. We internalize within-ﬁrm spillovers by estimating
the effects of the EU ETS at the ﬁrm-level. Consequently, within-ﬁrm leakage cannot explain es-
timated emissions reductions at the ﬁrm-level. Our estimates are net of any within-ﬁrm leakage.30

5.2 Abatement Channels

The absence of evidence on carbon leakage, combined with the estimated reduction in the carbon
intensity of value added, supports the view that emission reductions arose from improvements
to the emissions intensity of production. Such improvements can be achieved by switching to
less polluting fuels or by investing in technology that is more efﬁcient (or from investments in
technology that allows fuel switching). Our data allow us to explore these different channels of
abatement.

log(CO2/Value Addedit) = α + β log(total importsit) + it. We estimate the elasticity using all ﬁrms in years prior to
the EU ETS. The inclusion of ﬁrm and sector-year ﬁxed effects attenuates the estimate to -0.022. The upper bound
estimate for the increase in total imports is calculated as, 4.5% + 1.96 × 7.2%.

    30Of all regulated ﬁrms, 40% have unregulated CO2 emissions. In Table A.2 we document that the share of total
emissions that are regulated is very high in all sectors. In the Pharmaceuticals sector, which has the lowest average
share of total emissions that are regulated, 68.22% of emissions are regulated. On average, 88% of emissions in
regulated ﬁrms are covered by the ETS.

                                                         26
                                              Table 3: Exploring Mechanisms

                      Import Responses        Fuel-Mix Responses             Pollution-Control Investments  Productivity

                      (1)      (2)            (3)      (4)                   (5)  (6)       (7)             (8)

                      ∆ log(Imports) ∆ log(Imports) ∆ Gas Share ∆ Electricity ∆ asinh−1 ∆ asinh−1 ∆ asinh−1 ∆ log (TFPR)

                      Total    CO2 intensive  in CO2 Bought Share (Measurement) (Integrated) (Speciﬁc)

    Pre-ETS           -0.046   -0.050          0.000    0.000      0.230          -0.024     0.108          -0.011
                      (0.033)  (0.062)        (0.004)  (0.002)    (0.222)         (0.152)   (0.149)         (0.019)

    Trading Phase I    0.019    0.027         -0.009   -0.004      0.446          0.728***  0.356*          -0.026
                      (0.060)  (0.118)        (0.017)  (0.006)    (0.327)          (0.228)  (0.202)         (0.051)

27  Trading Phase II   0.045   -0.026         -0.018   -0.003     -0.013          0.684**   0.404***         0.049
                      (0.072)  (0.134)        (0.029)  (0.007)    (0.310)         (0.277)    (0.146)        (0.054)

    Mean in 2000      156.847  0.752          0.708    0.269      11.51           12.775    15.296          8.180
    Observations       2,298   2,267          2,348    2,348      1,237           1,419     1,419           2,270

    Notes: These estimates are the result of OLS regressions, estimated on a matched sample. Standard errors are clustered twoways: at the ﬁrm level and
    the matching group level. Each estimate reﬂects the difference between regulated ﬁrm and unregulated ﬁrm outcomes prior to implementation of the
    ETS and during Phase I and Phase II of the EU ETS. Each coefﬁcient represents the difference relative to the year 2000. Means are reported for ETS
    ﬁrms in 2000 (2001 for Columns 6 and 7). Units: total imports and CO2 Intensive Imports are measured in millions of euro; Gas Share of Emissions
    and Electricity Share of Total Energy Consumed are shares between 0 and 1; investment into the measurement of emissions is measured in thousands of
    euro; investment in integrated investments made in production processes and machines that are less carbon- or air pollution-intensive than alternative is
    measured in thousands of euro; investment into speciﬁc, ‘end-of-pipe’ measures to reduce emissions is measured in thousands of euro.Signiﬁcance levels
    are indicated as * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.
    In column 3 of Table 3 we estimate that there was no change in the share of natural gas in
total CO2 emissions. Another possible fuel-switching channel is that regulated ﬁrms used more
electric energy in the production process. The principal mechanism for this is by procuring more
electricity from the grid. In column 4 we estimate no signiﬁcant change in the share of electricity
procured in ﬁrms’ total energy use. Firms could also generate more electricity on site, but this
is quite rare among the ﬁrms in our sample and would lead to higher direct emissions, contrary
to what we ﬁnd. In Table B.9 we estimate no extensive-margin adjustments to on-site generation
from conventional and renewable sources. In sum, the results indicate that fuel switching to natural
gas or electricity cannot explain the estimated CO2 abatement at regulated ﬁrms. An implication
for climate change mitigation is that CO2 abatement by regulated manufacturing ﬁrms did not lead
to increased emissions in the electricity sector.31

    This leaves technology adoption as a possible mechanism behind the reductions in carbon
emissions and emissions intensity of regulated ﬁrms. The positive treatment effect on capital
stock is suggestive – but not conclusive – evidence that regulated ﬁrms invested in reducing the
emissions intensity of production. Columns 5–7 in Table 3 provide further evidence in support
of this hypothesis using data on pollution control investments for a sub-sample of ﬁrms in our
sample. Speciﬁcally, we estimate that regulated ﬁrms signiﬁcantly increased their investments in
integrated production technologies that reduce air and climate change related pollution emissions,
such as more efﬁcient boilers, during Trading Phases I and II (column 6). In column 5, we do
not estimate any differential impacts on investments into the measurement of emissions, which
in any case is not needed for CO2, given the ease of input-based accounting. We estimate smaller
impacts on investments into speciﬁc, ‘end-of-pipe’ measures to reduce emissions, which are not yet
easily available for CO2 at a commercial scale. A caveat to this analysis is that data for integrated
and speciﬁc investments were only collected from 2001 onward. Consequently, we are unable to
investigate whether trends in those outcomes are parallel during the pre-announcement period. We
do not estimate any differential effect prior to the introduction of the ETS for these variables, and
for measurement investments we do not estimate any differential effect in the pre-announcement
phase.

    A review of the metadata of the Antipol survey (see Section C.1) provides additional details
about the survey but does not provide much detail about the types of investments that ﬁrms make.
To gain further insight we take advantage of as-yet unused data from interviews conducted in
2009 with the managers of 140 French manufacturing ﬁrms, 92 of which participate in the EU
ETS (see Martin et al., 2014b, for details about the data collection). In Appendix C.2 we explore

    31It is likely that buying electricity would not lead to an increase in global emissions because 79% of the electricity
generated in France in 2012 was carbon neutral, and the remaining 21% – including the marginal generator– is likely
to have been produced by power plants under the EU ETS cap.

                                                         28
responses to interview questions pertaining to measures that were implemented at the production
site to reduce CO2 emissions. Managers were asked “Can you tell me what measures you have
adopted in order to reduce GHG emissions (or energy consumption) on this site? Have you bought
any new equipment, or have you changed the way you produce?” We document that more than
30% of managers report adopting optimization processes targeted at heating, waste heat recovery,
industry-speciﬁc processes or machinery, and lighting.32

    Firms participating in the EU ETS were more likely to report making investments to optimize
the use of process heat33, and to optimize processes speciﬁc to their industry, than non-ETS ﬁrms.
We note that these correlations are descriptive and do not necessarily represent causal relationships.
Nevertheless, in combination with our main results, these qualitative insights provide supporting
evidence for the hypothesis that ﬁrms invested in new processes to reduce emissions.

    Collectively, our ﬁndings suggest that the principal mechanism underlying the estimated emis-
sions reductions is that treated ﬁrms reduced the carbon intensity of production by upgrading their
capital stock.

5.3 Productivity

What remains unresolved is that ﬁrms reduced emissions without any detectable contraction in
economic activity, despite the fact that carbon pricing increased input costs. One hypothesis is that
the ETS induced ﬁrms to make investments that increased productivity, offsetting any costs to the
ﬁrm. However, the conditions under which such an interpretation can be rationalized are unclear.
To explore this conjecture, we present a model of ﬁrm production that guides our evaluation. We
use the structure of this model to estimate revenue-based Total Factor Productivity (TFPR) and
evaluate the effect of the EU ETS on measured TFPR. We estimate that, on average, the EU ETS
had a positive but statistically insigniﬁcant effect on measured TFPR. We explore the implications
of this ﬁnding ﬁrst through the lens of a parsimonious baseline model. In contrast to our empiri-
cal ﬁndings, this baseline model predicts contractions in economic activity and weakly decreasing
effects on productivity under the EU ETS. Next, we present a simple extension to the model incor-
porating the possibility of an alternative production technology that reduces the emissions intensity
of production but requires paying a ﬁxed switching cost. This extension rationalizes our empirical
ﬁndings, delivering the possibility of weakly increasing effects on value added, employment, total
capital, and productivity. The remainder of this section provides more details on each step of this
investigation.

    32More than 15% of managers reported switching to natural gas, modernizing the compressed air system, innovat-
ing in the production processes, upgrading the energy management system, and also improving waste management
and running employee awareness campaigns to reduce energy use.

    33As highlighted by Ammar et al. (2012), Barma et al. (2017) and Chowdhury et al. (2018), there is a sizable
potential for waste recovery in the industrial sector. We thank an anonymous referee for pointing us to those studies.

                                                         29
5.3.1 Model Environment

Consider a ﬁrm that uses capital K, energy services E, intermediate inputs M and labor L to
produce output Q.34 Using energy services gives rise to CO2 emissions when those services are
produced with fossil fuels. We assume a Cobb-Douglas production function

Q = AEαE KαK M αM LαL                                                   (3)

with returns-to-scale parameter γ ≡ αK + αE + αM + αL. The ﬁrm maximizes proﬁts subject to
an inverse isoelastic demand function35

                                  1 1−µ
P = ΛµQ µ                                                               (4)

where µ is the markup of prices over marginal costs and Λ is a demand shifter. Taking input prices,
WX, as given, a monopolistic ﬁrm’s proﬁt maximisation problem becomes

                                                                

                     1 1                                            
V = max E,K,M,L Λ µ Q µ −                                     WX X

                                 X ∈{E ,K,M ,L}                 

This leads to the following ﬁrst-order conditions (FOC),

X=  αX                                 11                               (5)

    µWX                           QµΛµ

for X ∈ {E, K, M, L}, where we assume that all input factors are ﬂexible. Using the production
function, we solve for optimal output

                                          Λ  αX             µ
Q∗ = A
                                  αX                      γ µ−γ
                  X ∈{E ,K,M ,L}  WX                      µ

                                                          γ .          (6)
                                                          µµ

    34Following the literature, we use the term ‘energy services’ to draw a distinction between the usage ﬁrms or
households derive commonly from speciﬁc fuels (e.g. heating), and units of the fuel (e.g. tonnes of coal). We abstract
from the fact that some energy services are derived from fuels that are not directly regulated at the ﬁrm level (e.g.
electricity). We also do not explicitly model that some fossil fuels (e.g natural gas in the chemical industry) are used
as direct inputs in the production process rather than to derive energy services.

    35This demand function would follow from a CES utility function in a monopolistic competition setting.

                                                         30
5.3.2 Measuring Total Factor Productivity (TFP)

Like most studies on ﬁrm-level productivity we do not observe physical output in our data. Instead,
we observe revenue. Given the log-linear demand model function (4) we can write revenue as:

                                                      11
                                               R = ΛµQµ.                                  (7)

Under our assumptions about the production function, this can be restated as

                                                  11            αX
                               R = ΛµAµ X µ .                                             (8)

                                                         X

Taking natural logarithms and using lower-case letters to denote logged variables yields

                                    1                           αX x                      (9)
                               r = (λ + a) +
                                            µ                      µ
                                                             x

From the FOC, we get the expression

                               X = 1 αX R ∀X
                                     µ WX

which we can rearrange to get

                               sX              ≡  WX X      =   αX                        (10)
                                                    R            µ

Substituting this into equation (9) yields

     1                                               sxx +      γ             αx k
r = (a + λ) +                                                     −           µ           (11)
                                                                µ
     µ                                         X =K                    X =K

where we have used the deﬁnition of the scale parameter γ = X αX. Rearranging terms leaves
us with the following expression, which clariﬁes the notion of revenue productivity, as a composite
of the technical efﬁciency a and the demand shifter λ:

1                                                            sx(x             γ
  (a + λ) = r −                                                     −  k)  −    k         (12)
µ                                                                             µ
                                                  x∈{e,l,m}

We examine two measures of TFPR that build on this formula.

                                                     31
The Index number–based TFP residual Consider

                              ω˜it = rit −                    s˘x (xit − kit) − kit                           (13)

                                                   x∈{e,l,m}

where s˘x are the median expenditure shares for factors energy (E), intermediates (M ) and labor
(L). Subscript i indexes a particular ﬁrm and t a time period.

    We use the median factor shares observed in the cross section of ﬁrms to reduce the impact
of outliers. If ﬁrms ﬂexibly adjust labor, intermediates, and energy (but not necessarily capital),
then the productivity index in equation (13) represents a composite of the production function and
demand shift parameters which can be interpreted as revenue productivity, ω˜it ≈ ait +λit, provided
that the returns-to-scale and markup parameters γ and µ are close to one.

The Estimation-based TFP residual If ﬁrms have non-constant returns-to-scale γ and/or markups

µ > 1 then the above approach is unlikely to provide a consistent estimate of revenue productivity.

In  this  case  we  need  an  estimate  of  γ  to  recover  an  index  ωit  =  1  (ait  +  λit)  of  revenue  productivity.
                                            µ                                  µ

This requires timing assumptions for ωit and kit. We assume an AR(1) process for ωit,

                                                   ωit = ρωit−1 + ηit                                         (14)

and that kit is pre-determined in period t.36 Under these assumptions we write:

                                            γ                       γ
                              Θit − µ kit = ρ Θit−1 − µ kit−1 + ηit

where Θit = rit − x∈{e,l,m} s˜x (xit − kit). Rearranging yields a regression equation

                                               γ   γ
                              Θit = µ kit + ρ µ kit−1 + ρΘit−1 + ηit                                          (15)

that we estimate by OLS and compute revenue productivity as

                                                                γˆ
                                                  ωˆit = Θit − µ kit.                                         (16)

In our empirical analysis we focus on this measure of TFPR because it is less restrictive. Results
are robust to using the index-based measure ω˜it.

    36This is a simpliﬁed version of approaches further discussed in Forlani et al. (2016) and Aghion et al. (2023) and in
line with similar approaches in the literatures; see, e.g., Klette & Griliches (1996); Olley & Pakes (1996); De Loecker
& Warzynski (2012); Ackerberg et al. (2015).

                                                         32
5.3.3 The Productivity Effects of the EU ETS

This subsection shows that the predictions of the above model match some — but not all — of our

empirical ﬁndings. This provides the motivation for extensions of the standard model that help to

fully rationalize our empirical results, which we introduce in the next subsection.

In line with the literature (Baumol & Oates, 1988), we consider that the main effect of the EU

ETS is to increase the price of energy services. If, as we have assumed above, proﬁt-maximizing

ﬁrms take factor costs as given, an increase in the price of carbon has no effect on a TFPR measure

based  on  equation  (12).  As  shown   in  Appendix  Section  D,  TFPR    remains  equal  to  ωit  =  1  (ait  +
                                                                                                       µ

λit).

Contrary to this, Greenstone et al. (2012) model that environmental regulation reduces TFP,

based on the notion that ﬁrms divert some exogenous share of their observed inputs to uses that

do not contribute to observed output but that are needed to comply with the regulation. In the

case of the EU ETS, such unproductive labor inputs may include employees that are in charge of

measuring emissions, managing the permit holdings, and communicating with the regulator. In the

context of our model this would imply that the amount of effective labor is a fraction ν of total

employment, i.e.,

                            QET S = AEαE KαK M αM (νL)αL = ναL Q.                                         (17)

The ﬁrst order conditions are unchanged and therefore QE∗ T S = ναLQ∗. The effect of the EU ETS
on TFP (ω) becomes

                                                ∂ω ∂q                  γ1
                     ∆ω     = ωET S  −ω     =              ∆ν  =   1−      µ αL ln ν
                                                ∂q  ∂ ln ν              µ

which is negative since ν < 1.

In column 8 of Table 3 we estimate that the EU ETS has no effect on measured TFPR, which is

more consistent with our baseline model than the extension by Greenstone et al. (2012). However,

we have other results that do not match the predictions of our baseline model, in particular the

predicted negative effects on value added, employment, and capital. In our setting, value added is

equal to

                                        VA = R − WEE − WM M                                               (18)

Hence,

                            ∂VA ∂R                           ∂E            ∂M
                            ∂WE = ∂WE − E − WE ∂WE − WM ∂WM

Note from equation (5) that      ∂E  =  −    E  +    αE ∂R   and  ∂M   =    αM ∂R   so that
                                ∂WE         WE      µWE ∂WE       ∂WE      µWE ∂WE

                     ∂VA ∂R             1 − αE         1 ∂Q       1 − αE − αM       <0
                           =                   µ    =
                     ∂WE ∂WE                          µ ∂WE            µµ

                                                    33
as   ∂Q  <  0 and αE + αM  <  µ.  A higher cost from carbon pricing implies that ﬁrms should reduce
    ∂WE

their output and, as a consequence, factor demand for all inputs. Ceteris paribus, value added,

capital, and employment should all fall. Instead, we estimate a signiﬁcant increase in capital

and positive (but statistically insigniﬁcant) effects of the ETS on value added, employment, and

measured TFP. To rationalize those results we need to augment the baseline model.

5.3.4 A Model with Technology Switching

We show that our empirical results are consistent with a model where ﬁrms can respond to higher
carbon prices by switching to an alternative production technology that saves energy thereby re-
ducing CO2 emissions. We also assume that this technology is characterized by higher TFP. Why
would ﬁrms not adopt this technology absent carbon pricing? We assume that adoption requires
ﬁrms to pay a ﬁxed switching cost, κ. The resulting trade-off between higher up-front invest-
ments and lower running costs is a common feature of many clean technologies. For example,
combined heat and power (CHP) generation or waste heat recovery technologies typically require
a re-organization of production facilities alongside up-front investments in additional equipment
which lead to subsequent reductions in running costs. Consistent with this narrative, these tech-
nologies featured prominently among the production changes that managers at ETS ﬁrms reported
in interview data discussed in Section 5.2 above (cf. Table C.1).37

    Formally, we assume that the alternative (clean) technology state is characterized by

                                  αE = αE − ξα                                     (19)

                                  αK = αK + ξα                                     (20)

                                  A = A + ξA.                                      (21)

That is this alternative technology is less energy intensive and more capital intensive (by ξα), and
has a higher TFP (by ξA). Firms apply a discount rate of r and will therefore switch to the new
technology if the present discounted value of doing so exceeds the switching cost of κ, i.e.,

                                  (Π − Π)  1+r  >κ                                 (22)

                                           r

where Π and Π denote per period proﬁts of the ﬁrm in the “clean” and “dirty” technology states,
respectively. We argue that, prior to the introduction of the ETS, the marginal ﬁrm may not have
been willing to make the ﬁxed cost investment. However, following the introduction of a carbon
price, which increases energy prices and the cost of using the traditional technology, the present

    37Firms may also innovate to reduce emissions (Calel & Dechezlepreˆtre, 2016), another ﬁxed-cost investment likely
to boost TFP.

                                  34
discounted value of making that investment may exceed the ﬁxed cost of switching technologies.38
    Figure 4 visualizes a parameterization of the difference in proﬁts between the “clean” and

“dirty” technology states for a range of energy prices. The relationship has a hyperbolic inverted-
U shape, which tends to minus inﬁnity if the energy price tends to zero, and tends to zero as the
energy price tends to inﬁnity. This is because using a more energy intensive production technology
is (inﬁnitely) more proﬁtable if energy costs nothing and, at the other extreme, because any use
of energy makes production unproﬁtable if energy is inﬁnitely costly. In between, there is a range
of energy prices where the extra discounted proﬁt from adopting exceeds the switching cost κ –
provided κ is not too high – leading the ﬁrm to adopt the clean production technology.

                          Figure 4: Relative Proﬁts from Technology Switching

    The introduction of carbon pricing results in two scenarios. If the carbon price is too high or
too low, no technology switching occurs. Firms remain with the traditional production technology.
Higher marginal costs reduce energy usage (and hence emissions) as well as value added and other
inputs – ﬁrms contract. As discussed in the previous section, measured TFP remains unchanged.
We provide a parameterization of this scenario in Figure 5, panel a).

    Within the intermediate range of carbon prices, technology switching occurs. After switching,
output – along with value added – could increase or decrease compared to a state without carbon

    38In practice, managers may use simpler decision rules, such as maximum payback time, which amounts to using
high discount rates in equation (22). In interviews with managers of French manufacturing ﬁrms (further described
in Appendix C.2), Martin et al. (2014b) asked about the maximum payback time required for an energy-efﬁciency
enhancing measure the ﬁrm had considered but not adopted. The median (mean) answer was 3 (3.6) years. Without
carbon pricing, many energy efﬁciency investments may not pay back the investment cost fast enough to satisfy this
criterion.

                                                         35
pricing. To show which factors determine the direction of this change, we write log output as

               q (ξα, ξA) =       µ  [a  +  ξA  +  (αE  −   ξα)  (ln  (αE  −  ξα)  −  ln  WE )  +
                                µ−γ

                                         (αK + ξα) (ln (αK + ξα) − ln WK) +

                                              X∈{L,M} [αX (ln αX − ln WX )]

where a ≡ ln A. A ﬁrm that was initially using the traditional technology (ξα = ξA = 0) and
switches technologies due to an increase in the carbon price will see its output affected via changes
in ξα, ξA, and ln WE,

dq  (0, 0)  =  ∂q  (ξα = 0, ξA  =  0)           +  ∂q  (ξα  = 0, ξA   =  0)     +     ∂q  (ξα  = 0, ξA  =  0)
                      ∂ ln WE        d ln WE                 ∂ξα           dξα                  ∂ξA          dξA.

The ﬁrst term captures the direct effect of the carbon price on output. It is strictly negative because
it captures an increase in marginal costs,

                                      ∂q(0, 0)              µ
                                      ∂ ln WE = − µ − γ αE < 0.

    The second term captures the effect on output resulting from the reduction in energy intensity
due to the new technology,

               ∂q (0, 0)           µ
                   ∂ξα = µ − αE − αK [− (ln αE − ln WE) + (ln αK − ln WK)] .                               (23)

The sign of this term is ambiguous. The change in technology reduces the energy intensity of

production and increases the intensity of capital. This lowers marginal costs if energy is expensive,

since the new technology relies on it less. If, however, energy were cheap compared to capital

before the arrival of carbon pricing, then the transition to using capital more intensely may increase

marginal costs. Likewise, the relative size of αE and αK matters. When αE is low relative to αK

the second term is more likely to be positive. Intuitively, this is because for every inframarginal

unit of energy that becomes less effective when the ﬁrm switches technologies, there is more than

one inframarginal unit of capital that becomes more effective.

The third term captures the output effect of an increase in TFP by ξα, which is unambiguously

positive,

                                         ∂q (0, 0) µ             > 0.
                                                   =
                                            ∂ξA         µ−γ

The overall effect on output and, consequently, value added and proﬁts, depends on the relative

magnitude of these terms. Panel (b) of Figure 5 illustrates a parameterization of the model in

which technology switching induces a reduction in CO2, a net increase in output (and value added)

                                                       36
           Figure 5: The Effect of Carbon Pricing with and without Technology Switching

Notes: The ﬁgure illustrates the dynamics in outcome variables for different technology states. With technology
switching (b), CO2 emissions fall more sharply than without switching (a). The productivity-enhancing effect of
the new technology leads to an increase in value added. Measured TFP trails the increase in actual TFP because
measured capital overstates the amount of productive capital. Since data on one-off investments to switch production
technologies is not separately available from other investments in ﬁxed capital, measured capital likely includes any
switching costs. Measured capital exceeds pre-policy levels and subsequently depreciates geometrically, reducing the
bias in measured TFP.

as well as the corresponding increases in measured capital and measured TFP that coincide with
switching.39

    Our empirical results, which document reductions in emissions, increases in measured capital,
and weakly increasing effects on value added and measured TFPR, are consistent with the case in
which technology switching induces increases in TFP and reductions in marginal cost sufﬁcient
enough to offset the contractionary effects of carbon pricing.

6 Aggregate Carbon Savings

We combine our estimates with the aggregated microdata on CO2 emissions to gauge the extent
to which the EU ETS might have driven aggregate emission reductions since 2005. Details on the
calculations below can be found in Appendix D.

    The black line in Figure 6, constructed using our microdata, depicts observed aggregate indus-
trial CO2 emissions in France between 1996 and 2012. We observe that aggregate emissions have
been falling over time, and that the decline has been steeper in recent years.

    39The purpose of this calibration is to illustrate the possible range of outcomes. We leave more substantive calibra-
tion exercises for future research.

                                                         37
               Figure 6: The Effect of the EU ETS on Aggregate Emissions Reductions

Notes: The black line presents the aggregate time series for industrial emissions in France, measured in millions
of tonnes of CO2. The dark gray line represents counterfactual emissions in the absence of the EU ETS, using our
difference-in-differences estimates and assuming that 75% of industrial emissions are regulated. The dashed black line
represents the level of emissions in 2004 as a benchmark. Source: Authors calculations based on French microdata
and Eurostat data.

    We see a substantial aggregate drop in emissions starting in 2005 at the start of the ETS and
again in 2008 at the start of Phase II. The dashed line plots emissions in 2004 as a benchmark.
These ﬁndings are consistent with our empirical evidence, but the question remains: How much
did the ETS contribute to these aggregate reductions?

    We calculate that between 2005 and 2012 aggregate emissions would on average have been
5.4 million tonnes higher each year if there were no EU ETS. Compared to 2004 emissions, this
accounts for 28% of the aggregate emissions reduction during this period. Using the linear trend
in emissions prior to 2005 as a benchmark instead of emissions in 2004 would lead us to attribute
47% of the aggregate emissions reduction during this period to the EU ETS. These calculations
highlight the importance of causal research designs for evaluating the efﬁcacy of climate policy.
Of the aggregate emissions reductions in our data, 53-72% are driven by other factors, such as
structural economic change, energy efﬁciency improvements, or the Great Recession. Drawing
inferences about the effectiveness of the ETS based on aggregate patterns and trend-breaks would
lead us to vastly overestimate the efﬁcacy of the EU ETS.

    The emissions reductions observed in the data occurred in spite of carbon prices averaging a
relatively low $21.35 per tonne ($2017) during Phase II. The average abatement costs per tonne
of CO2 must have been lower, since it would otherwise have been more proﬁtable for ﬁrms to
purchase permits instead of reducing emissions.

    Does that make the EU ETS an expensive policy? Previous research on air pollution regulation

                                                         38
           Figure 7: Comparing the EU ETS to other Climate Change Mitigation Policies

Notes: This ﬁgure ranks different climate change policies by the estimated cost of reducing a tonne of CO2 in $2017.
The value chosen for the EU ETS is the maximum permit price that was observed during phase II – e29.33 on 1st July
2008. We then convert this to U.S. dollars using the exchange rate on that day and then account for inﬂation between
2008 and 2017. The maximum cost of reducing a tonne of CO2 was $52.68. The actual cost was likely far lower,
since this is the maximum price at which ﬁrms would have been indifferent between reducing emissions and buying
permits. Despite this conservative choice, the EU ETS is ranked 7th out of 25. The cost of other policies are taken
from Gillingham & Stock (2018). Where multiple estimates exist for the same policy, we take the average across all
estimates.

has established that the overall cost of market-based instruments compares favorably with that
of non-market based approaches (Carlson et al., 2000; Fowlie et al., 2012; Gillingham & Stock,
2018). In Figure 7 we compare the estimated cost per tonne of CO2 ($2017) for 25 climate change
mitigation policies. The estimate for the EU ETS is based on the maximum price during Phase
II, which was $52.68. This is an upper bound cost estimate — above this cost it would have been
cheaper for ﬁrms to buy emission permits instead. Estimates for other climate change mitigation
policies come from Gillingham & Stock (2018). Even when we use the maximum cost per tonne
of CO2, the EU ETS is ranked 7th. If we use the average Phase II price instead ($21.35), which is
still likely to be very conservative, the EU ETS is ranked 5th. We caveat that this exercise assumes
that the EUA price is unaffected by the other energy and climate policies discussed in Appendix
B.4. While we do not think that these policies differentially affected ETS ﬁrms, their existence
may have had an aggregate effect, resulting in a lower equilibrium permit price. This would have
the effect of making the ETS as a whole (i.e., including the electricity sector) appear cheaper than
it would have been if these policies did not exist.

                                                         39
7 Conclusion

In the context of the world’s largest carbon market, we have presented evidence that market-based
regulatory instruments have the potential to reduce carbon emissions without imposing signiﬁcant
economic losses on regulated ﬁrms. We ﬁnd little evidence that carbon leakage played a mean-
ingful role in contributing to emissions reductions, indicating that, at least in this context, the EU
ETS helped to mitigate global climate change. Our ﬁndings are consistent with ﬁrms paying an
up-front ﬁxed cost to invest in alternative “clean” production technologies that reduce marginal
variable costs. The results suggest that, when ﬁrms make such investments, decarbonization may
only be costly in the transition phase, rather than in the long term.

    Our results contrast with the impacts of command-and-control regulations that impose one-
size-ﬁts-all regulatory standards for industrial air pollution emissions. While they may deliver
improvements in environmental quality, such non-market-based policies have been shown to neg-
atively affect ﬁrm performance (Becker & Henderson, 2000; Greenstone, 2002; Greenstone et al.,
2012; Walker, 2013; He et al., 2020).

    We note caveats. First, despite the signiﬁcant effect that the EU ETS has had on emissions,
these results should not be taken as a blanket endorsement of market-based regulatory instruments.
Our ﬁndings have focused on the response of manufacturing ﬁrms in one market, and on one
market-based regulatory instrument – emissions trading systems. Our context is one in which
compliance is high and corruption low. Second, while we do not estimate any signiﬁcant contrac-
tions in economic activity, this does not imply that emissions reductions were made without cost.
Finally, our results do not guarantee that the ETS operates efﬁciently. Credit constraints, informa-
tion asymmetries, market power in product markets, transaction costs, and other sources of market
failure could all affect the efﬁciency of the scheme.

References

Abadie, A. & Spiess, J. (2022). Robust post-matching inference. Journal of the American Statis-
  tical Association, 117(538), 983–995.

Ackerberg, D., Caves, K., & Frazer, G. (2015). Identiﬁcation properties of recent production
  function estimators. Econometrica, 83, 2411–2451.

Aghion, P., Benabou, R., Martin, R., & Roulet, A. (2023). Environmental preferences and tech-
  nological choices: Is market competition clean or dirty? American Economic Review: Insights,
  5(1), 1–20.

                                                         40
Ammar, Y., Joyce, S., Norman, R., Wang, Y., & Roskilly, A. P. (2012). Low grade thermal energy
  sources and uses from the process industry in the uk. Applied Energy, 89(1), 3–20. Special issue
  on Thermal Energy Management in the Process Industries.

Andersen, B. & Di Maria, C. (2011). Abatement and allocation in the pilot phase of the EU ETS.
  Environmental and Resource Economics, 48(1), 83–103.

Barma, M., Saidur, R., Rahman, S., Allouhi, A., Akash, B., & Sait, S. M. (2017). A review
  on boilers energy use, energy savings, and emissions reductions. Renewable and Sustainable
  Energy Reviews, 79(C), 970–983.

Baumol, W. (1972). On taxation and the control of externalities. American Economic Review,
  62(3), 307–322.

Baumol, W. & Oates, W. (1971). The use of standards and prices for protection of the environment.
  Swedish Journal of Economics, 73, 42–54.

Baumol, W. & Oates, W. (1988). The Theory of Environmental Policy. Cambridge University
  Press.

Becker, R. & Henderson, J. (2000). Effects of air quality regulations on polluting industries.
  Journal of Political Economy, 108(2), 379–421.

Bergounhon, F., Lenoir, C., & Mejean, I. (2018). A Guideline to French Firm Level Trade data.
  Unpublished, CREST-Ecole Polytechnique.

Borghesi, S., Franco, C., & Marin, G. (2020). Outward Foreign Direct Investment Patterns of
  Italian Firms in the European Union’s Emission Trading Scheme. The Scandinavian Journal of
  Economics, 122(1), 219–256.

Burke, M., Craxton, M., Kolstad, C., Onda, C., Allcott, H., Baker, E., Barrage, L., Carson,
  R., Gillingham, K., Graff-Zivin, J., Greenstone, M., Hallegatte, S., Hanemann, W., Heal, G.,
  Hsiang, S., Jones, B., Kelly, D., Kopp, R., Kotchen, M., Mendelsohn, R., Meng, K., Metcalf, G.,
  Moreno-Cruz, J., Pindyck, R., Rose, S., Rudik, I., Stock, J., & Tol, R. (2016). Opportunities for
  advances in climate change economics. Science, 352(6283), 292–293.

Calel, R. (2020). Adopt or innovate: Understanding technological choices under cap-and-trade.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 12(3), 170–201.

Calel, R. & Dechezlepreˆtre, A. (2016). Environmental Policy and Directed Technological Change:
  Evidence from the European Carbon Market. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(1), 173–
  191.

                                                         41
Carlson, C., Burtraw, D., Cropper, M., & Palmer, K. (2000). Sulfur dioxide control by electric
  utilities: What are the gains from trade? Journal of Political Economy, 108(6), 1292–1326.

Chowdhury, J. I., Hu, Y., Haltas, I., Balta-Ozkan, N., Matthew, G. J., & Varga, L. (2018). Reducing
  industrial energy demand in the uk: A review of energy efﬁciency technologies and energy
  saving potential in selected sectors. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 94, 1153–
  1178.

De Jonghe, O., Mulier, K., & Schepens, G. (2020). Going Green by Putting a Price on Pollution:
  Firm-level Evidence from the EU. National Bank of Belgium Working Papers 390.

De Loecker, J. & Warzynski, F. (2012). Markups and ﬁrm-level export status. American Economic
  Review, 102(6), 2437–71.

Dechezlepreˆtre, A., Nachtigall, D., & Venmans, F. (2023). The joint impact of the european
  union emissions trading system on carbon emissions and economic performance. Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management, 118, 102758.

Eaton, J., Kortum, S., & Kramarz, F. (2011). An anatomy of international trade: Evidence from
  French ﬁrms. Econometrica, 79(5), 1453–1498.

Egenhofer, C., Alessi, M., Fujiwara, N., & Georgiev, A. (2011). The EU Emissions Trading System
  and Climate Policy Towards 2050: Real Incentives to Reduce Emissions and Drive Innovation?
  Centre for European Policy Studies Special Report.

Ellerman, A. D. & Buchner, B. K. (2008). Over-Allocation or Abatement? A Preliminary Analysis
  of the EU ETS Based on the 2005–06 Emissions Data. Environmental and Resource Economics,
  41(2), 267–287.

Ellerman, A. D., Convery, F. J., & De Perthuis, C. (2010). Pricing Carbon: The European Union
  Emissions Trading Scheme. Cambridge University Press.

Ellerman, A. D. & Feilhauer, S. M. (2008). A Top-down and Bottom-up Look at Emissions Abate-
  ment in Germany in Response to the EU ETS.

Ellerman, D., Marcantonini, C., & Zaklan, A. (2016). The European Union Emissions Trading
  System: Ten Years and Counting. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 10(1), 89–
  107.

European Commission (2000). Green Paper on Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trading within the
  European Union. Green Paper.

                                                         42
European Commission (2001). Green Paper on Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trading within the
  European Union - Summary of Contents. Green Paper.

Fabra, N. & Reguant, M. (2014). Pass-Through of Emissions Costs in Electricity Markets. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 104(9), 2872–2899.

Forlani, E., Martin, R., Mion, G., & Muuˆls, M. (2016). Unraveling ﬁrms: demand, productivity
  and markups heterogeneity. CEP Discussion Papers, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.

Fowlie, M., Holland, S., & Mansur, E. (2012). What Do Emissions Markets Deliver and to
  Whom? Evidence from Southern California’s NOx Trading Program. American Economic
  Review, 102(2), 965–993.

Fowlie, M., Reguant, M., & Ryan, S. (2016). Market-based emissions regulation and industry
  dynamics. Journal of Political Economy, 124(1), 249–302.

Freyaldenhoven, S., Hansen, C., & Shapiro, J. (2019). Pre-event trends in the panel event-study
  design. American Economic Review, 109, 3307–3338.

Gerster, A., Lehr, J., Pieper, S., & Wagner, U. J. (2021). The Impact of Carbon Trading on Industry:
  Evidence from German Manufacturing Firms. Mimeo, University of Mannheim.

Gillingham, K. & Stock, J. (2018). The cost of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 32(4), 53–72.

Greenstone, M. (2002). The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial Activity: Evi-
  dence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census of Manufactures.
  Journal of Political Economy, 110(6), 1175–1219.

Greenstone, M., List, J., & Syverson, C. (2012). The Effects of Environmental Regulation on the
  Compettitiveness of US Manufacturing. NBER Working Paper No. 18392.

Hahn, R. W. (1989). Economic prescriptions for environmental problems: How the patient fol-
  lowed the doctor’s orders. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 3(2), 95–114.

He, G., Wang, S., & Zhang, B. (2020). Watering Down Environmental Regulation in China.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(4), 2135–2185.

Heckman, J., Ichimura, H., & Todd, P. (1997). Matching as an econometric evaluation estimator:
  Evidence from evaluating a job training programme. Review of Economic Studies, 64, 605–654.

Heckman, J., Ichimura, H., & Todd, P. (1998). Matching as an econometric evaluation estimator.
  Review of Economic Studies, 65, 261–294.

                                                         43
Hendren, N. & Finkelstein, A. (2020). Welfare analysis meets causal inference. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, 34(4), 146–67.

Hendren, N. & Sprung-Keyser, B. (2020). A uniﬁed welfare analysis of government policies.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(3), 1209–1318.

Hintermann, B. (2016). Pass-Through of CO2 Emission Costs to Hourly Electricity Prices in
  Germany. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 3(4), 857–
  891.

Ho, D., Imai, K., King, G., & Stuart, E. (2007). Matching as nonparametric preprocessing for
  reducing model dependence in parametric causal inference. Political Analysis, 15(3), 199–236.

Jaraite, J. & Di Maria, C. (2016). Did the EU ETS make a difference? An empirical assessment
  using Lithuanian ﬁrm-level data. Energy Journal, 37(1), 1–23.

Klemetsen, M. E., Rosendahl, K. E., & Jakobsen, A. L. (2020). The impacts of the EU ETS
  on Norwegian plants’ environmental and economic performance. Climate Change Economics,
  11(1).

Klette, T. & Griliches, Z. (1996). The inconsistency of common scale estimators when output
  prices are unobserved and endogenous. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 11(4), 343–61.

Koch, N. & Basse Mama, H. (2019). Does the EU Emissions Trading System induce investment
  leakage? Evidence from German multinational ﬁrms. Energy Economics, 81, 479 – 492.

Lo¨schel, A., Lutz, B. J., & Managi, S. (2019). The impacts of the EU ETS on efﬁciency and
  economic performance. An empirical analysis for German manufacturing ﬁrms. Resource and
  Energy Economics, 56(C), 71–95.

Marin, G., Marino, M., & Pellegrin, C. (2018). The impact of the European Emission Trading
  Scheme on multiple measures of economic performance. Environmental and Resource Eco-
  nomics, 71, 551–582.

Martin, R., de Preux, L., & Wagner, U. (2014a). The impact of a carbon tax on manufacturing:
  Evidence from microdata. Journal of Public Economics, 117, 1–14.

Martin, R., Muuˆls, M., de Preux, L., & Wagner, U. (2014b). Industry compensation under relo-
  cation risk: A ﬁrm-level analysis of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme. American Economic
  Review, 104(8), 1–24.

                                                         44
Martin, R., Muuˆls, M., & Wagner, U. J. (2016). The Impact of the European Union Emissions
  Trading Scheme on Regulated Firms: What Is the Evidence after Ten Years? Review of Envi-
  ronmental Economics and Policy, 10(1), 129–148.

Mayer, T., Melitz, M., & Ottaviano, G. (2014). Market size, competition, and the product mix of
  exporters. American Economic Review, 104(2), 495–536.

Montgomery, W. (1972). Markets in licenses and efﬁcient pollution control programs. Journal of
  Economic Theory, 5(3), 395–418.

Nordhaus, W. (1977). Economic growth and climate: The carbon dioxide problem. American
  Economic Review, 67(1), 341–346.

Nordhaus, W. (2001). Global warming economics. Science, 294(5545), 1283–1284.

Olley, G. S. & Pakes, A. (1996). The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equip-
  ment industry. Econometrica, 64(6), 1263–97.

Pigou, A. (1920). The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan.

Rambachan, A. & Roth, J. (2023). A more credible approach to parallel trends. Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 90, 2555–2591.

Roth, J. (2022). Pretest with caution: Event-study estimates after testing for parallel trends. Amer-
  ican Economic Review: Insights, 4(3), 305–322.

Ryan, S. P. (2012). The Costs of Environmental Regulation in a Concentrated Industry. Econo-
  metrica, 80(3), 1019–1061.

Tietenberg, T. (1973). Controlling pollution by price and standard systems: A general equilibrium
  analysis. Swedish Journal of Economics, 75, 193–203.

Vogt-Schilb, A. & Hallegatte, S. (2014). Marginal abatement cost curves and the optimal timing
  of mitigation measures. Energy Policy, 66, 645–653.

Walker, W. R. (2013). The Transitional Costs of Sectoral Reallocation: Evidence from the Clean
  Air Act and the Workforce. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 1787–1835.

Zaklan, A. (2023). Coase and Cap-and-Trade: Evidence on the Independence Property from the
  European Electricity Sector. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 15(2), 526–58.

Zubizarreta, J. R., Paredes, R. D., & Rosenbaum, P. R. (2014). Matching for balance, pairing for
  heterogeneity in an observational study of the effectiveness of for-proﬁt and not-for-proﬁt high
  schools in Chile. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 8(1), 204 – 231.

                                                         45
Online Appendix

Contents

A Data Appendix                                               1

A.1 Sample Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

A.2 Representativeness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

B Additional Results and Robustness                           7

B.1 Full-Sample Difference-in-Differences Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

B.2 Alternative Matching Speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

B.3 The Great Recession . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

B.4 Overlapping policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

B.5 Firm Exit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

C Abatement Investment and other Emissions Reducing Measures  19

C.1 The Antipol survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

C.2 Emission-reducing measures as reported by managers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

D Derivations and Calculations                                22

D.1 Carbon Price Effect on Revenue TFP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

D.2 Aggregate Effects of the EU ETS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
A Data Appendix

A.1 Sample Construction

Figure A.1 presents a visualization of our sample construction process, whereby we combine pub-
licly available data from the European Union Transaction Log (EUTL) registry (on the left) with
statistical ﬁrm-level data made available to researchers through the CASD (on the right). Regard-
ing the EUTL, data on participation in the ETS for France includes 1,295 installations that are
reported to have participated (at least for one year) in Phase I and/or Phase II of the EU ETS. Of
these, 906 of are combustion installations. These combustion installations are largely in the elec-
tricity sector, although manufacturing installations are also engaged in combustion (e.g., steel).
All installations were matched to a SIREN number – a ﬁrm level identiﬁer. The match was con-
ducted using a look-up table provided by the French authorities, or through a manual name and
address-based matching process. In some cases, the manual process identiﬁed changes in SIREN,
identiﬁers, or acquisitions, in which cases we aim to aggregate at the most appropriate ﬁrm level.
Some ﬁrms have more than one installation regulated under the EU ETS. The 1,295 installations
in the EUTL are identiﬁed to be part of 716 ﬁrms. Their average annual veriﬁed emissions re-
ported to the EU ETS total to 123 million tonnes of CO2. Note that we exclude from this ﬁrms
that are only included in the EU ETS through aviation, which was initiated in 2012. Through the
CASD, we link energy use (EACEI) survey data, available for manufacturing installations, to trade
and balance-sheet (FICUS/FARE) data available for manufacturing ﬁrms. Firms are included in
our sample if they report in at least the year 2000 and one other year, positive employment, CO2
emissions, energy use, value added, and capital. We also impose that they report positive imports
in 2000, given that all ETS ﬁrms were importers in that year. This corresponds to 4,201 ﬁrms.
We match these ﬁrms on the basis of their SIREN identiﬁer to those from the EUTL registry, and
identify 252 EU ETS ﬁrms in our dataset, corresponding to a total of 52.4 million tonnes of CO2
average annual veriﬁed emissions. Of the 464 ETS ﬁrms that are not matched to our administra-
tive data 81% are combustion installations, and most likely power plants. The non-combustion
unmatched ﬁrms are either non-manufacturing or not observed in our data. When comparing the
veriﬁed emissions reported in the market’s EUTL (in green on the left of each corresponding box)
to the emissions resulting from fuels usage reported in the EACEI (in orange on the right of each
corresponding box), they are on aggregate at a similar level. However, when comparing these for
each ﬁrm, one must keep in mind that it is unlikely for these to be perfectly equal. Apart from
statistical or reporting discrepancies, the main reason for this is that in some industrial sectors,
such as cement, chemicals or fertilisers, carbon emissions arise not only from the combustion of
fossil fuels, but also from the industrial processes themselves. In France, it is estimated that a
quarter of GHG emissions from manufacturing are process emissions, and half of these are from
the decarbonation process (for example when limestone is heated). The EACEI reports only the
usage of fuels, from which we impute CO2 emissions, and their correlation is represented in the
quantile-quantile plot against veriﬁed emissions in Figure A.2. We see that, for the vast majority of
the distribution measured and reported emissions map closely to each other. The gap is very close
to the 45-degree line except for a few ﬁrms at higher levels of emissions, where veriﬁed emis-
sions (which include combustion and process emissions) are larger than EACEI emissions (which
include only combustion of fossil fuels). Given the small number of ﬁrms with such a gap, the
correlation between imputed and veriﬁed emissions is 0.96 and signiﬁcant at the 1% level.

                                                          1
                                       Figure A.1: Sample Construction

Notes: This ﬁgure presents the different steps involved in constructing our sample of analysis. The EUTL is the publicly available EU ETS registry.
The EACEI, FICUS/FARE and Trade data are made available by the CASD. All datasets are described in Section 3. The ﬁgures in green on the left
below each text boxes report the total of average annual emissions reported in the EUTL between 2005 and 2012 for that group of ﬁrms in million
tonnes of CO2. The ﬁgures in orange below the text boxes on the right report the total average emissions from combustion computed from the
EACEI in million tonnes of CO2 between 2005 and 2012. The 252 ETS and 3.949 non-ETS ﬁrms represent the full sample before matching. The
149 ETS and 114 non-ETS ﬁrms represent the matched sample.

                                      Figure A.2: Quantile-Quantile Plot

Notes: This ﬁgure presents a quantile-quantile plot of the quantiles of CO2 veriﬁed emissions reported in the EUTL against the quantiles of CO2
emissions computed from the EACEI for each ﬁrm in our full sample. The emissions for both variables are the average of these annual measures
between 2005 and 2012. The line represents a 45 degrees along which both variables are equal. The plot is truncated to include only ﬁrms whose
average veriﬁed emissions in the EUTL are below 10 million tonnes.

                                                          2
Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics – Matched Sample

                   (1)    (2)            (3)      (4)     (5)                                 (6)

                   Observations Mean     St. Dev. 10th perc. Median 90th perc.

CO2                4,156  49.224       136.605    2.090   13.3621                             90.523
Employment         4,156  601.866     1,111.713     87      319                                1,200
Value Added        4,156  46.753       105.508                                                97.012
Capital Stock      4,156  119.211      233.178    4.956   20.478                              250.341
CO2/VA             4,156   2.483                  12.069  59.629                               4.640
Total Imports      4,156  113.707      10.740     0.0568   0.890                              199.736
Carbon Intensive   4,156   1.231       632.207            24.568                               1.632
Imports                                             2.3    0.191
Gas Share          4,156                6.251     0.012
Electricity Share  4,156
Pollution Control         0.760          0.362      0     0.977                                 1
Investment:        3,800  0.321          0.217    0.101   0.257                               0.658
                   2,760
     Measurement   2,760  8.107 45.485            0       0                                   10
     Integrated
     Speciﬁc              42.637 248.454          0       0                                   50.275

                          51.808 562.109          0       0                                   43.5

Notes: Column 1 reports the number of observations (ﬁrms × years), Columns 2 and 3 report the mean and standard
deviation of each variable measured across all years of data. Columns 4 to 6 present the median, 10th percentile and 90th
percentile. Units CO2 – thousands of tonnes of CO2; Value Added – millions of euro; Employment – full-time equivalent
employees; Capital – millions of euro; CO2/VA – tonnes of CO2 per thousand euro of value added; Imports – millions
of euro; Gas Share – Gas CO2/CO2; Purchased Electricity/Total Energy Consumed in tonnes of oil equivalent. Electricity
bought is converted to tonnes of oil equivalent using the conversion factor, tonnes of oil equivalent = MWh×0.086; Pollution
control investment – Thousands of euro.

Table A.2: Share of Regulated Emissions and Group Size – Matched Sample

Sample                    Regulated CO2/CO2 Number of Firms
                           ETS Non-ETS ETS Non-ETS

Steel (16)                93.94% 0%               9       5

Ceramics (21)             96.15% 0%               8       11

Glass (22)                93.22% 0%               15      10

Plastics and Rubber (25) 85.74% 0%                4       6

Organic Chemicals (26) 86.20% 0%                  12      11

Pharmaceuticals (28)      96.80% 0%               7       9

Textiles and Leather (34) 69.77% 0%               6       9

Paper and Pulp (35)       92.58% 0%               48      17

Various industries (38) 100%                  0%  9       6

Other (0)                 93.24% 0%               31      30

Notes: Sector classiﬁcations are deﬁned using the NCE nomenclature. Statistics are cal-
culated using observations in the year 2000. We construct the sector ”Other” to satisfy
statistical disclosure constraints. This sector includes all ﬁrms that are not in the listed
NCE sectors.

                                      3
Figure A.3: Density plots showing differences between regulated and unregulated ﬁrms in the pre-
and post-match samples (CO2 Emissions, Value Added, and Employment)

(a) CO2 (Unmatched)            (b) CO2 (Matched)

(c) Value Added (Unmatched) (d) Value Added (Matched)

(a) Employment (Unmatched)     (b) Employment (Matched)

Notes: The ﬁgures report the density plots of log CO2 emissions, log value added, and log employment in the year 2000, our base year. In all
ﬁgures, the blue lines represent regulated ﬁrms. In the unmatched sample the distribution of each variable for unregulated ﬁrms is represented in
red. For the matched sample the distribution of each variable for unregulated ﬁrms is represented in green.

                            4
Figure A.4: Density plots showing differences between regulated and unregulated ﬁrms in the pre-
and post-match samples (Capital and CO2/Value Added)

(a) Capital (Unmatched)     (b) Capital (Matched)

(c) CO2/VA (Unmatched)      (d) CO2/VA (Matched)

Notes: The ﬁgures report the density plots of log capital and log emissions intensity deﬁned as CO2 emissions/value added in the year 2000, our
base year. In all ﬁgures, the blue lines represent regulated ﬁrms. In the unmatched sample the distribution of each variable for unregulated ﬁrms is
represented in red. For the matched sample the distribution of each variable for unregulated ﬁrms is represented in green.

                         5
A.2 Representativeness

To assess how representative our sample of French manufacturing ﬁrms is of the broader set of
EU manufacturing ﬁrms regulated by the EU ETS, we downloaded emissions data from http:
//www.euets.info/, which augments data on veriﬁed CO2 emissions from the European
Union Transaction Log (EUTL) with NACE industry classiﬁcations from EU sources. We compute
the share of total manufacturing CO2 emissions by industry at the 3-digit NACE code level. Figure
A.5 compares ETS ﬁrms in France (orange) with the remaining EU countries (EU27 excluding
France, in blue) for the most emissions intensive sectors, based on average veriﬁed emissions at
the beginning of the ETS (2005 and 2006).

             Figure A.5: CO2 emissions intensity across 3-digit manufacturing industies

                                                      Source: Own calculations based on www.euets.info.

    The four most emissions-intensive industries in France also constitute the top four in the rest
of Europe, although the ranking among the top three is not the same. While the larger role of the
chemical industry is conﬁrmed, it seems that cement plays a smaller, and iron & steel, a larger
role in France than in the rest of the EU. In sum, regulated emissions in France do not exactly
correspond to the EU27-average, but can be considered representative at a broader level. This
conclusion holds true when we compare France to groups of countries that can be considered
closer competitors, such as the EU top ﬁve economies excluding France (Germany, UK, Italy,
Spain, and the Netherlands) or the top ten (top ﬁve plus Poland, Belgium, Sweden, Austria and
Ireland).

    Aside from the emissions share of certain industries, we compare the distribution of carbon
intensity across ﬁrms in different countries to assess representativeness. This necessitates a mea-
sure that relates CO2 emissions to output or other inputs. Obtaining comparable microdata at the
ﬁrm level is not trivial and is the subject of ongoing research. Wagner et al. (2020) compiled and

                                                          6
                         Figure A.6: CO2 emissions per worker in the ETS sector

Notes: Figure shows the natural log of direct CO2 emissions per full-time employee in regulated ETS ﬁrms. Emissions are averaged over the years
2004, 2007, and 2012. Own calculations based on Figure 7 in Wagner et al. (2020)

analyzed administrative microdata on energy use and resulting CO2 emissions from seven Euro-
pean countries, including France. This allows us to construct CO2 intensity measures in a way
that is consistent across countries and allows us to compare our French manufacturing sample to
its equivalent in other countries. Figure A.6 shows selected deciles of the natural log of direct
CO2 emissions per full-time employee in ETS ﬁrms (emissions are averaged over the years 2004,
2007, and 2012). In terms of median emissions, French manufacturing is less CO2 intensive than
Norwegian manufacturing, but very similar to those of Denmark, Finland, Lithuania. The median
German and Swedish ETS ﬁrm is more emissions intensive than its French counterpart, but not to
a large degree, and the distributions largely overlap.

B Additional Results and Robustness

B.1 Full-Sample Difference-in-Differences Results

Here we present our main results using the full sample of ﬁrms. As documented in Table 1, there
are very large baseline differences between ETS and unmatched non-ETS ﬁrms, raising concerns
about the potential validity of parallel trends for the full sample. Figure 2 suggests that there are
not meaningful differences in the trajectories of unmatched non-ETS and ETS ﬁrms in the raw data
prior to the announcement of the ETS, but that ETS and unmatched non-ETS ﬁrms start to diverge
during the announcement phase. In contrast, matched non-ETS ﬁrms follow a similar trajectory to
ETS ﬁrms until the policy comes into effect, which alongside smaller baseline differences (Table
1) motivates our choice to use the matched sample in our main analysis.

    Table B.1 and B.2 present descriptive statistics for the full sample. Table B.3 presents difference-

                                                          7
                   Table B.1: Descriptive Statistics – Full Sample

                   (1)     (2)         (3)      (4)                 (5)  (6)

                   Observations Mean St. Dev. 10th perc. Median 90th perc.

CO2                46,546  23.007      439.906   .139   1.105            15.814
Employment         46,546  456.125     994.231    93     213               889
Value Added        46,546  29.341      82.108   3.522   10.478
Capital Stock      46,546  53.228      175.094  3.372   16.509           58.189
CO2/VA             46,546   0.756      10.676   0.0146  0.090            107.360
Total Imports      46,546  48.859      241.562  2.300   9.194             1.237
Carbon Intensive   46,546   0.326               0.002   0.049            89.908
Imports                                 2.276
Gas Share          46,546                                                 0.516
Electricity Share  46,546
Pollution Control          0.672       0.422      0     0.958              1
Investments:       36,567  0.498       0.245    0.187   0.474            0.856
                   23,998
     Measurement   23,998  2.877 27.839         0                   0    0.376
     Integrated
     Speciﬁc               20.011 151.794       0                   0    13.704

                           18.929 228.147       0                   0    6.812

Notes: Column 1 reports the number of observations (ﬁrms × years), Columns 2 and 3 report the mean and standard
deviation of each variable measured across all years of data. Columns 4 to 6 present the median, 10th percentile and
90th percentile. Units CO2 – thousands of tonnes of CO2; Value Added – millions of euro; Employment – full-time
equivalent employees; Capital – millions of euro; CO2/VA – tonnes of CO2 per thousand euro of value added; Imports –
millions of euro; Gas Share – Gas CO2/CO2; Electricity Share – Purchased Electricity/Total Energy Consumed in tonnes
of oil equivalent. Electricity bought is converted to tonnes of oil equivalent using the conversion factor, tonnes of oil
equivalent = MWh×0.086; Pollution control investment – Thousands of euro.

in-differences results using our full sample. Figure B.1 presents event study estimates of the results
in Table B.3. In the full sample, we estimate similar results to the matched sample; however, the
magnitudes of the emissions reductions in Phase I and Phase II are much larger (-22% and -33%,
respectively). Unlike the matched sample, we also estimate small but statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ferential reductions in emissions for regulated ﬁrms during the announcement period and prior to
the announcement of the EU ETS. While this is a violation of the parallel trends assumption, the
estimated results do not reﬂect a common declining trend over time. We also do not see any differ-
ential pre-trends for the other outcome variables, all of which reﬂect small and precise null effects.
While there does not appear to be any systematic violation of the parallel trend assumption, the
small violation for emissions, the large baseline differences between treatment and control ﬁrms,
and much larger estimated treatment effects, including announcement period declines for regulated
ﬁrms, provide less conﬁdence than the matched sample, which does not face these issues. Never-
theless, it is encouraging to see qualitatively similar patterns in the full sample, suggesting that the
insights from our matched sample may have some external validity and be broadly representative
of the effect of the ETS on regulated ﬁrms.

                                    8
            Table B.2: Descriptive Statistics by Treatment Status and Sector – Full Sample

Sample                                 Mean CO2     Regulated CO2/CO2 Mean Employment Number of Firms

                                       ETS Non-ETS ETS Non-ETS ETS Non-ETS ETS Non-ETS

Steel (16)                             2083.768 121.114 92.29% 0% 2140.385 405.294 13       17

Cement and Lime (20)                   346.486 145.658 99.54% 0%        379.600 734.200 15         5

Ceramics (21)                          38.844 15.850 96.92% 0%          266.700 289.168 10  101

Glass (22)                             148.590 7.314 91.53% 0% 1,274.348 263.158 23         38

Inorganic Chemicals (24)               341.539 55.597 100%  0%          238.400 327.769 5   26

Plastics and Rubber (25)               76.406 64.640 88.60% 0%          414.000 237.370 5   27

Organic Chemicals (26)                 321.652 36.432 81.17% 0% 1,366.350 376.326 20        92

Pharmaceuticals (28)                   14.747 3.990 92.56% 0% 1,221.125 542.069 8           175

Electronic and Electrical Engineering (31) 21.905 2.426 78.41% 0% 5,681.250 692.679 4       371

Textiles and Leather (34)              19.434 2.258 77.32% 0%           583.375 237.608 8   360

Pulp and Paper (35)                    59.681 9.116 87.85% 0%           426.422 232.473 64  131

Rubber Products (36)                   124.897 4.954 89.17% 0% 7,221.800 488.824 5          51

Plastic Material Transformation (37)   34.334 1.318 100%    0%          590.250 296.796 4   269

Various (38)                           25.396 1.711 100%    0%          444.778 293.435 9   382

Other (0)                              135.771 5.745 81.83% 0% 1,429.254 388.691 59 1,904

Notes: Sector classiﬁcations are deﬁned using the NCE nomenclature. Means are calculated using observations in the year 2000. We
construct the sector ”Other” to satisfy statistical disclosure constraints. This sector includes all ﬁrms that are not in the listed NCE
sectors. Units: CO2 – thousands of tonnes of CO2; Employment – full-time equivalent employees

Table B.3: The Effect of the EU ETS on the Environmental and Economic Performance of Firms
– Full Sample

Pre-Announcement                (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
Announcement Period
Trading Phase I            ∆ log(CO2)  ∆ log(Value Added)  ∆ log(Emp.)  ∆ log(Capital)  ∆ log(CO2/VA)
Trading Phase II
                           -0.0408***         -0.0334        -0.00956       -0.0243         -0.0353*
                             (0.0124)         (0.0281)       (0.0184)      (0.0215)         (0.0203)
                                               0.0150        0.000548      0.00423        -0.0595***
                           -0.0627***         (0.0279)       (0.0129)      (0.0140)         (0.0205)
                             (0.0149)         -0.0631         -0.0149       0.0214         -0.144***
                            -0.220***         (0.0509)       (0.0323)      (0.0385)         (0.0493)
                             (0.0432)         -0.0468         -0.0253      0.00523         -0.264***
                            -0.333***         (0.0650)       (0.0466)      (0.0603)         (0.0604)
                             (0.0600)

Mean in 2000               229.351     84.655               1,140.222   204.422            3.058
Observations               46,546      46,546                46,546     46,546             46,546

Notes: This table presents estimates from OLS regressions estimated on the full sample. Standard errors are clustered at the ﬁrm level. Each
estimate reﬂects the difference between regulated ﬁrm and unregulated ﬁrm outcomes relative to the year 2000. We present estimates for four time
periods: prior to the announcement of the EU ETS, during the announcement period, and during Phase I and Phase II of the EU ETS. Means are
reported for ETS ﬁrms in 2000. Units: CO2 – thousands of tonnes of CO2; Value Added – millions of euro; Employment – full-time equivalent
employees; Capital – millions of euro; CO2/VA units – thousands of tonnes of CO2 per thousand euro of value added. Signiﬁcance levels are
indicated as * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.

                                                 9
Figure B.1: The Effect of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme on the Environmental and Economic
Performance of Firms – Full Sample

(a) CO2 Emissions  (b) Carbon Intensity

(c) Value Added    (d) Employment

                                                      (e) Capital Stock

Notes: These ﬁgures present estimates from OLS regressions, using the full sample. All variables are in logs and normalized at the year 2000.
Vertical red lines relate to the different phases of the EU ETS. The EU ETS was announced in 2000 and the ﬁrst phase began in 2005. Phase II of
the EU ETS began in 2008. Standard errors are clustered at the ﬁrm level.

                                                         10
B.2 Alternative Matching Speciﬁcations

In the baseline speciﬁcation we match 149 treated ﬁrms with replacement using 114 untreated
ﬁrms as controls. Table B.4 presents results for log emissions when using a range of alternative
matching speciﬁcations. The estimated reduction in emissions in Phase I and Phase II is robust
to those alternative matching speciﬁcations. Our other outcome variables are also robust to dif-
ferent matching speciﬁcations. The post-match differences for each of the corresponding matched
samples are reported in Table B.5.

                               Table B.4: Alternative Matching speciﬁcations

                                                            ∆ log(CO2 Emissions)

                     (1)       (2)             (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)      (7)       (8)        (9)

Pre-Announcement       0.028     0.024          -0.027        0.013    -0.003     -0.001    -0.012     0.028     -0.038
Announcement Period   (0.021)   (0.020)         (0.020)      (0.019)   (0.019)    (0.018)   (0.017)   (0.021)    (0.025)
Trading Phase I        0.014     0.014          -0.009        0.012     0.007      0.009    -0.002     0.007      0.011
Trading Phase II      (0.025)   (0.025)         (0.057)      (0.026)   (0.024)    (0.024)   (0.023)   (0.025)    (0.025)
                     -0.140**  -0.139**        -0.116**     -0.112**  -0.113**    -0.104*  -0.118**  -0.146***  -0.118**
                      (0.057)   (0.058)         (0.054)      (0.057)   (0.056)    (0.054)   (0.052)   (0.056)    (0.073)
                     -0.163**  -0.156**        -0.126*      -0.135*   -0.129*     -0.119*  -0.137**  -0.168**   -0.169**
                      (0.075)   (0.074)         (0.074)      (0.073)   (0.072)    (0.069)   (0.068)   (0.072)    (0.073)

Observations          2,348          2,348         1,910    4,338     6,280       8,168    9,994       2,284    2,069
# Regulated Firms      149            149           124      149       149         149      149         145      127
Alternative          Baseline  Fewer Matching     Without   2 NN      3 NN        4 NN     5NN       Common     Multi-
Speciﬁcation                       Variables   Replacement                                           Support     Year

Notes: These estimates are the result of OLS regressions, estimated on a matched sample. They provide the difference between regulated
ﬁrm and unregulated ﬁrm outcomes prior to the announcement of the EU ETS, during the announcement period and during Phase I and
Phase II of the EU ETS. Each coefﬁcient represents the difference relative to the year 2000. Standard errors are two-way clustered by ﬁrm
and matching group. Different matching speciﬁcations are presented in each column as speciﬁed by the line “Alternative Speciﬁcation”.
Signiﬁcance levels are indicated as * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.

    We present additional robustness approaches. Table B.6 presents an evaluation of how sensi-
tive the baseline matched sample results are to the choice of matching restriction. We ﬁnd that
when imposing tighter distance restrictions, the signiﬁcance and magnitude of the reduction in
CO2 emissions in both phases is reduced. Dropping 25% of the sample (column 5) results in a
statistically insigniﬁcant reduction in emissions during Phase I and Phase II. The magnitude of the
coefﬁcients, however, remain non-trivial at around -10%. Column 6 reports cardinality matching
following (Zubizarreta et al., 2014). The post-match differences for each of the corresponding
matched sample are reported in Table B.7.

                                                    11
              Table B.5: Post-match Differences for Alternative Matching Speciﬁcations

                                                                  ∆ Post-Match Differences

                         (1)                 (2)           (3)     (4)        (5)            (6)   (7)         (8)        (9)
                      Baseline       Fewer Matching     Without
Alternative                                          Replacement   2 NN       3 NN          4 NN   5NN Common Multi-
Speciﬁcation                             Variables
                                                                                                               Support Year

log (CO2)             0.944***        0.924***        1.546***     1.041***   1.121***  1.215***   1.312***    0.912***   1.034***
log (Employment)       (0.157)         (0.157)         (0.164)      (0.148)    (0.149)   (0.155)    (0.156)     (0.158)    (0.158)
log (Value Added)       0.135           0.122         0.243***      0.181**   0.194**   0.192**     0.212**      0.131    0.177**
log (Capital Stock)    (0.0993)        (0.100)        (0.0684)      (0.0879)  (0.0849)  (0.0854)    (0.0885)    (0.102)   (0.0812)
log (CO2/VA)            0.176           0.175         0.373***     0.276***   0.306***  0.340***   0.386***      0.172    0.241**
log (Total Imports)    (0.120)         (0.122)        (0.0805)      (0.0964)  (0.0948)  (0.0968)    (0.0986)    (0.123)    (0.106)
Gas Share             0.444***        0.439***        0.698***     0.585***   0.632***  0.665***   0.709***    0.441***   0.537***
Elec. Bought Share     (0.152)         (0.152)        (0.0907)      (0.116)    (0.112)   (0.110)    (0.111)     (0.155)    (0.133)
                      0.768***        0.748***        1.172***     0.765***   0.814***  0.875***   0.926***    0.740***   0.793***
                       (0.0936)        (0.0953)        (0.136)      (0.119)    (0.126)   (0.131)    (0.137)     (0.0946)   (0.100)
                       -0.0114        -0.000242         0.148        0.0958     0.134     0.177      0.216     -0.00842    0.0980
                       (0.222)         (0.222)         (0.121)      (0.170)    (0.168)   (0.164)    (0.160)     (0.224)    (0.224)
                       -0.0647         -0.0292         0.00496      -0.0656    -0.0791   -0.0859    -0.0832     -0.0520    -0.0785
                       (0.0592)        (0.0736)       (0.0448)      (0.0618)  (0.0569)  (0.0572)    (0.0575)    (0.0594)  (0.0502)
                      -0.0375**       -0.0408**      -0.0987***    -0.0405**  -0.0348*  -0.0390*   -0.0447**   -0.0378**   -0.0136
                       (0.0171)        (0.0191)       (0.0240)      (0.0193)  (0.0196)  (0.0203)    (0.0217)    (0.0175)  (0.0219)

Observations in year 2000 298         298                 246      548        794           1,036  1,268       290        254

# of Regulated Firms  149             149                 124      149        149           149    149         145        127

Notes: Reported coefﬁcients measure the average difference in outcome variables between treatment and control ﬁrms in 2000. Two-way clustered standard
errors (by ﬁrm and matching group) are reported too. Each column presents these for the different matching alternatives presented in Table B.4. Units
(Logarithms of): CO2 – thousands of tonnes of CO2; Value Added – thousands of euro; Employment – full-time equivalent employees; Capital – thousands
of euro; CO2/VA units – hundred thousands of tonnes of CO2 per euro of value added; Imports – euro; Gas Share – CO2 from Gas/Total CO2; Electricity
Bought Share – Purchased Electricity/Total Energy Consumed in tonnes of oil equivalent. Purchased electricity is converted from MWh to tonnes of oil
equivalent using the conversion factor, tonnes of oil equivalent = MWh×0.086. Signiﬁcance levels are indicated as * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.

                                      Table B.6: Matching restrictions

                                                                   ∆ log(CO2 emissions)

                                (1)                  (2)           (3)                  (4)               (5)             (6)

Pre-Announcement        0.028                      0.030             0.033          0.039*         0.039*                 -0.011
Announcement Period    (0.021)                    (0.021)           (0.021)         (0.021)        (0.023)                (0.027)
Trading Phase I         0.014                      0.014             0.016           0.024          0.036                  0.047
Trading Phase II       (0.025)                    (0.026)           (0.026)         (0.027)        (0.028)                (0.030)
                      -0.140**                   -0.144**          -0.124**         -0.105*        -0.095                 -0.080
                       (0.057)                    (0.058)           (0.056)         (0.055)        (0.061)                (0.064)
                      -0.163**                   -0.166**          -0.129*          -0.097         -0.107                 -0.008
                       (0.075)                    (0.075)           (0.072)         (0.073)        (0.083)                (0.095)

Matching restriction No Restrictions 99th Percentile 95th percentile 90th Percentile 75th Percentile Cardinality

Observations                   2,348             2,318             2,237                2,109           1,767             1,271
# of Regulated Firms            149               147               142                  135             115               85

Notes: These estimates are the result of OLS regressions, estimated on a matched sample. They provide the difference between
regulated ﬁrm and unregulated ﬁrm outcomes prior to the announcement of the EU ETS, during the announcement period and
during Phase I and Phase II of the EU ETS. Each coefﬁcient represents the difference relative to the year 2000. Distance
restrictions between treatment and control ﬁrms are imposed at different percentiles in columns (1) to (5). Column (6) reports
the results with cardinality matching following (Zubizarreta et al., 2014) when limiting absolute standard deviations for each
matched covariates to be no greater than 0.05. Standard errors are two-way clustered by ﬁrm and matching group. Signiﬁcance
levels are indicated as * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.

                                                               12
Table B.7: Post-match Differences for Alternative Matching Restrictions

                                                 ∆ Post-Match Differences

                           (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)

Matching Restrictions      No Restrictions 99th Percentile 95th percentile 90th Percentile 75th Percentile Cardinality

log (CO2)                  0.944***   0.911***       0.908***   0.846***   0.723***   0.165
log (Employment)            (0.157)    (0.152)        (0.132)    (0.111)   (0.0995)  (0.153)
log (Value Added)            0.135      0.113          0.124     0.124*    0.126**    0.0381
log (Capital Stock)         (0.0993)   (0.0972)       (0.0807)  (0.0646)   (0.0582)  (0.115)
log (CO2/VA)                 0.176      0.147          0.154*   0.159**    0.164**    0.0158
log (Total Imports)         (0.120)    (0.116)        (0.0887)  (0.0775)   (0.0739)  (0.128)
Gas Share                  0.444***   0.420***       0.439***   0.451***   0.426***   0.148
Elec. Bought Share          (0.152)    (0.151)        (0.118)   (0.0943)   (0.0686)  (0.135)
                           0.768***   0.764***       0.754***   0.687***   0.559***   0.149
                            (0.0936)   (0.0937)       (0.0896)  (0.0805)   (0.0758)  (0.149)
                            -0.0114    -0.0691        -0.0923    -0.0652    -0.0258  -0.0908
                            (0.222)    (0.218)        (0.188)    (0.165)    (0.114)  (0.230)
                            -0.0647    -0.0675        -0.0521    -0.0308    -0.0249  -0.0450
                            (0.0592)   (0.0598)       (0.0564)  (0.0568)   (0.0648)  (0.0583)
                           -0.0375**  -0.0361**      -0.0356**  -0.0309*   -0.0339*   0.0193
                            (0.0171)   (0.0173)       (0.0177)  (0.0180)   (0.0192)  (0.0204)

Observations in year 2000  298        294            284        270        230       170

# of Regulated Firms       149        147            142        135        115       85

Notes: Reported coefﬁcients measure the average difference in outcome variables between treatment and control ﬁrms in 2000. Two-
way clustered standard errors (by ﬁrm and matching group) are reported too. Each column presents these for a different matching
alternative, as presented in Table B.6. Units (Logarithms of): CO2 – thousands of tonnes of CO2; Value Added – thousands of euro;
Employment – full-time equivalent employees; Capital – thousands of euro; CO2/VA units – hundred thousands of tonnes of CO2 per
euro of value added; Imports – euro; Gas Share – CO2 from Gas/Total CO2; Electricity Bought Share – Purchased Electricity/Total
Energy Consumed in tonnes of oil equivalent. Purchased electricity is converted from MWh to tonnes of oil equivalent using the
conversion factor, tonnes of oil equivalent = MWh×0.086. Signiﬁcance levels are indicated as * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.

B.3 The Great Recession

As discussed in Section 4.2, part of our treatment period overlaps with the Great Recession of
2008. While the US saw its GDP beginning to decline in 2008, the French economy stagnated,
with a 0.25% increase in GDP, and entered the recession only in 2009. This Appendix seeks to test
whether our estimates of the impact of the EU ETS on emissions and other economic outcomes
are driven by the Great Recession rather than the policy.

    Idiosyncratic shocks over time, such as a recession, underline the need to conduct evaluations
with ﬁrm-level data, comparing treated and non-treated ﬁrms. However, there remains a concern
that such a dramatic shock interacts differentially with the somewhat larger ETS ﬁrms compared
to the untreated control ﬁrms. The issue can be addressed by identifying meaningful variation in
the severity of the Great Recession shock across ﬁrms in our sample. To this end, consider the
following regression model:

         Yit = αET Si × Dt + θDt + βEET Si + βRRECk(i)t + γRECk(i)t × ET Si + it

where ﬁrms i differs in treatment status (ET S) and in terms of a recession shock RECk(i)t. The
indicator variable Dt is equal to one in all periods when the ETS is active. The shock is assumed
to be common for ﬁrms in the same cluster k(·), such as the same geographic area or sector.

    Moreover, even if faced with the same recession shock, the effect will be different for the type

                                                 13
Figure B.2: Spatial Variability in Depth of Great Recession

Notes: Change in unemployment level for each of the 96 French departments between 2008 and 2009 measured in
percentage. Each year’s unemployment is calculated as the mean of the year’s quarterly ﬁgures. Source: INSEE,
https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/series/102760732

of ﬁrms that are part of the ETS, where ET Si = 1. For ease of notation, we assume that the
recession shock is zero in t = 0, the base year. Taking within-ﬁrm differences between year t
and the base year, we compute difference-in-differences between and ETS ﬁrm i and a non-ETS
control ﬁrms l as

∆2Yil,t = Yit − Yit − (Yl0 − Yl0)

= α + (βR + γ) × RECk(i)t − βRRECk(l)t + ∆2νil,t             (24)

where ∆2νil,t = it − io − ( lt − lo).
    This equation suggests that we can recover an unbiased ETS estimate of the policy effect α by

regressing ∆2Yil,t on the treatment dummy while also controlling for both recession shocks – the
one affecting the treated ﬁrm, RECk(i)t, and the one affecting its matched control ﬁrm RECk(l)t.

    To implement this empirically, we construct two different ks: one spatial and one sectoral mea-
sure of recession exposure that proxies for the recession shock RECk. At the geographic level,
we compute for each department (de´partement) d the change in unemployment levels U between
2008 and 2009, ∆Ud. As shown in Figure B.2, some departments (in green) saw minor increases
in unemployment rates while others, such as the Doubs, suffered a deeper recession, with increases
of up to 2.5%. At the sector level, we measure the change in employment levels E between 2008
and 2009 by 4-digit NAF s, ∆Es, aggregating ﬁrm-level employment from FICUS/FARE by year
and s. The higher the decrease in employment, the harder the hit of the recession: employment
decreased strongly in some sectors (such as the Manufacture of optical instruments and photo-
graphic equipment, where it fell by 50%) but increased in others. Exposure to the Great Recession
RECk(i)t is thus deﬁned as ∆Ud (for the department level) or ∆Es (for the sector level) if t = 2008
or t = 2009 and zero otherwise. Table B.8 shows the results of estimating equation (24) where
we control for the two types of RECk(j)t, for both the treated and matched untreated ﬁrms. The

14
                       Table B.8: Controlling for the Great Recession

Pre-Announcement            (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
                       ∆ log(CO2)  ∆ log(Value Added)  ∆ log(Emp.)  ∆ log(Capital)  ∆ log(CO2/VA)
Announcement Period
                          0.028            0.009           0.002        -0.012            0.022
Trading Phase I          (0.021)          (0.039)         (0.025)       (0.025)          (0.037)
                          0.014            0.014          -0.002         0.014            0.013
Trading Phase II         (0.025)          (0.040)         (0.019)       (0.021)          (0.034)
                        -0.140**           -0.050          0.005        0.083*           -0.099
Great Recession          (0.057)          (0.085)         (0.036)       (0.046)          (0.068)
(Departement) Treated    -0.145*           0.120           0.084        0.112*          -0.171**
Great Recession          (0.081)          (0.087)         (0.055)       (0.065)          (0.085)
(Sector) Treated          -0.060           -0.033         -0.032         0.101            0.020
Great Recession          (0.126)          (0.145)         (0.107)       (0.112)          (0.140)
(Departement) Control     -0.836         -3.547**       -2.275***      -2.105**        2.625***
Great Recession          (1.056)          (1.396)         (0.838)       (0.817)          (0.818)
(Sector) Control          0.033            0.019          -0.012        -0.091           -0.035
                         (0.125)          (0.136)         (0.100)       (0.101)          (0.136)
                          0.444            0.209           0.473         0.077           -0.231
                         (1.230)          (1.670)         (1.001)       (0.856)          (0.679)

Mean in 2000           82.107      55.600              684.215      132.919         3.398
Observations           2,348       2,348                2,348        2,348          2,348

Notes: This table presents estimates from OLS regressions, estimated on a matched sample. Standard errors are
clustered in two ways, at the ﬁrm level and at the matching group level. Each estimate reﬂects the difference
between regulated ﬁrm and unregulated ﬁrm outcomes relative to the year 2000. We present estimates for four
time periods: prior to the announcement of the EU ETS, during the announcement period and during Phase I and
Phase II of the EU ETS. We control for measures of the Great Recession severity in the Departement region and
NAF sectors of the treated and matched control ﬁrms. Means are reported for ETS ﬁrms in 2000. Units: CO2
– thousands of tonnes of CO2; Value Added – millions of euro; Employment – full-time equivalent employees;
Capital – millions of euro; CO2/VA units – thousands of tonnes of CO2 per thousand euro of value added. Great
Recession variables are in percentage. Signiﬁcance levels are indicated as * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.

inclusion of these variables has no effect on our Phase I treatment effect, as should be expected. In
Phase II the coefﬁcient is slightly attenuated from -16.3% in our main results to -14.5%.

B.4 Overlapping policies

Here we discuss the potential for other energy and climate policy interventions to interact with
EU ETS incentives during our study period. If interactions with the EU ETS regulations induced
systematic differences in ﬁrm behavior across treated and control ﬁrms we would be unable to
separately identify the effects of the EU ETS from other policies. Below, we list and review
overlapping policies and discuss their potential to confound our results.

Power purchase obligation and guaranteed feed-in tariffs Since 2003, the French electricity
company EDF has been obliged to purchase power generated from certain sources at a guaranteed
rate.

                                           15
    This policy overlaps with our sample period and may have provided incentives for ﬁrms to
generate electricity. A threat to identiﬁcation would arise from this policy if treated and control
ﬁrms perceived such incentives differently. Since the policy was introduced prior to the imple-
mentation of the ETS, we can test for this directly by looking at pre-trends in outcome variables
that speak directly to those incentives. In Figures 2 and 3a we do not see a drop in emissions until
2005, indicating that the 2003 purchase power agreements did not have an immediate effect on
emissions. In Table B.9 we see that, in 2000, 35% of ﬁrms generated electricity from thermal en-
ergy and 4% produced renewable electricity. Importantly, we do not estimate any effect of the EU
ETS on self-generation of either form of electricity, suggesting that power purchase obligations are
unlikely to be an important confounding source of variation. The estimated coefﬁcients are small
and statistically insigniﬁcant in all periods.

Table B.9: On-site Generation of Electricity

                           Sources

                      (1)           (2)

                  Renewable Thermal

Pre-Announcement       0.004    0.002
Announcement          (0.004)  (0.024)
Trading Phase I       -0.010   -0.035
Trading Phase II      (0.009)  (0.026)
                       0.002    0.023
                      (0.016)  (0.039)
                      -0.008    0.056
                      (0.020)  (0.041)

Mean in 2000          0.349         0.040
Observations          2,348         2,348

Notes: These estimates are the result of OLS regressions,
estimated on a matched sample. Standard errors are clus-
tered twoways: at the ﬁrm level and the matching group
level. Each estimate reﬂects the difference between regu-
lated ﬁrm and unregulated ﬁrm outcomes prior to implemen-
tation of the ETS and during Phase I and Phase II of the EU
ETS. Each coefﬁcient represents the difference relative to
the year 2000. Means are reported for ETS ﬁrms in 2000.
Units: . Signiﬁcance levels are indicated as * 0.10 ** 0.05
*** 0.01.

    The results in Table B.9 also suggest that feed-in tariffs for renewables and small combined
heat and power (CHP) with up to 12 MW of capacity, introduced in 2001, are also unlikely to
have affected our identiﬁcation of the EU ETS.40 Therefore, while these other policies were im-
portant to the power sector (CRE, 2014), they do not seem to have differentially affected electricity
generation at the manufacturing ﬁrms in our sample.

Electricity taxes To fund feed-in tariffs, the French government introduced the contribution au
service public de l’e´lectricite´ (CSPE) tax in January of 2003, which was levied on electricity

    40In Appendix C.2 we show that there is no association between the installation of a CHP plant or exploitation of
renewable energy sources and participation in the EU ETS.

                  16
consumption by ﬁrms and households. The effect of this tax is therefore comparable to any indirect
treatment effects that may arise from the EU ETS. Our matching strategy results in matched pairs
whose average difference in the share of electricity bought is a mere three percentage points. This
should go a long way to control for effects arising from differential exposure to electricity prices
and surcharges.

    In addition, exemptions from the CSPE were granted for (i) metallurgical activities with chem-
ical reduction or electrolysis, (ii) products for which the electricity cost represented more than half
of the product cost, (iii) manufacturing of non-metallic mineral products, and (iv) electricity used
in the context of energy production activities. These exemptions are limited to highly electricity-
intensive production processes. Their potential to confound abatement incentives under the ETS is
therefore likely to be limited after matching on sector and the share of electricity purchased. We
again note that there are no changes in emissions prior to the introduction of the ETS when these
taxes were introduced and restate that there was no change in the share of electricity purchased or
self-generated electricity, either prior to the EU ETS when the CPSE was introduced, or after the
EU ETS was implemented.

Fuel taxes Historically, excise taxes in France have been levied on petroleum-based fuels, and
on transportation fuel in particular. Additional taxes on coal, gas and fuel oil were introduced in
2006 and 2007 so as to comply with the minimum taxes stipulated in EU Directive 2003/96/EC
for the taxation of energy products and electricity. Callonnec (2009) provides an overview of
the CO2 price implicit in those excise taxes, ﬁnding that CO2 produced by gasoline burning was
heavily taxed at 265 euro per tonne vs. a nominal 6 euro per tonne of CO2 from burning fuel oil
and natural gas. Certain fossil fuels and speciﬁc applications were completely exempt, including
coal used in industry and natural gas in a broad range of industrial applications (Callonnec, 2009).
Due to low nominal levels of the tax and the broad exemptions granted in industrial uses, we have
no reason to believe that they could confound ETS treatment effects when we match treated and
control ﬁrms within sectors.

    The French government also contemplated proposals to replace those excise taxes on fuels by
a uniform tax on CO2 by 2010, but such a tax was not implemented until long after the end of our
sample period.

National energy efﬁciency plan Like other EU member states, France is required to design and
implement measures conducive to meeting the EU-wide targets for energy efﬁciency improvements
stipulated by the Energy Efﬁciency Directives.41 Relevant to our study period is the ﬁrst Energy
Efﬁciency Action Plan (Re´publique Franc¸aise, 2008). The plan stipulated a national energy savings
target and devised sector-speciﬁc measures for achieving that target. The focus was on sectors not
included in the EU ETS, such as buildings, services, and transportation, because ETS sectors
were already subject to an absolute emissions target implicit in the cap. Because of this, the plan
contained only two measures targeting industry energy use.

    41See “Energy Services Directive” 2006/32/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, of 5 April 2006, on
energy end-use efﬁciency and energy services and repealing Council Directive 93/76/EEC. See also “Energy Efﬁciency
Directive” 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on energy efﬁciency,
amending Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC text with
EEA relevance.

                                                         17
    Minimum efﬁciency levels were imposed for low-wattage boilers (4 kW to 400 kW) and for
boilers with capacity between 400 kW and 50 MW. In addition, operators of the latter category of
boilers were required to put in place control devices for monitoring actual boiler efﬁciency and the
combustion quality. Since this requirement applied equally to small and large boilers, we would
not expect this policy instrument to have differential effects on treated and control ﬁrms. The same
argument applies to a third feature — period inspections of thermal plants with a power greater
than 1 MW. Designed to ensure compliance with minimum efﬁciency levels, this policy instrument
would apply to virtually all boilers in both the treatment and matched control group.

    Standardization projects were coordinated nationwide by an energy management coordina-
tion group tasked with the deﬁnition of a common method for assessments and quality inspections
of industrial energy management. The method “favours regular dialogue between the assessor and
the industrialist during the assessment phases, which are an inventory of the company’s overall
energy situation, quantiﬁcation of energy savings potential and deﬁnition of the actions needed for
these energy savings.” (Re´publique Franc¸aise, 2008, p. 27).

    It does not appear as though these measures were intended as stringent policies for curbing
industrial emissions. Rather, the energy efﬁciency plan targeted energy use outside the industrial
and energy sectors. In fact, only 1% of the total energy savings envisaged by the French en-
ergy efﬁciency action plan were contributed by the industrial sector; the remaining 88% and 10%
were expected to come from the residential and transportation sectors, respectively (Re´publique
Franc¸aise, 2011, p. 6).

    We conclude that overlapping energy and climate policies in France were unlikely to be a ﬁrst-
order driver of the strong and robust estimated emissions reductions that we attribute to the EU
ETS.

B.5 Firm Exit

The context of our study is a period of de-industrialization in France, as is reﬂected by the secular
downward trend in CO2 emissions. Between 2005 and 2012, the number of active manufacturing
enterprises in France decreased by 5.9%, and this decrease was more pronounced in some sectors
covered by the ETS.42 This macroeconomic environment emphasizes the need to directly control
for emissions reductions caused by structural change, so as to not misattribute them to the EU
ETS. Analyzing the potential for differential ﬁrm exit, however, presents a number of empirical
challenges. We need to be able to distinguish a ﬁrm exit from a merger or acquisition, as well as
from sampling variation. Regarding identiﬁcation, the parallel trends assumption needs to hold for
exit rates.

    Data limitations preclude a direct examination of ﬁrm exit. The dataset is an unbalanced sample
of ﬁrms, meaning that ﬁrm dropouts could be attributed to exit, mergers, acquisitions, or due to
sampling. To minimize the contribution of differential ﬁrm exit, we focus on a balanced sample
of stayers in our main analysis. We restrict to ﬁrms that are observed at least once in each of the
four periods, minimizing the potential for bias arising from differential ﬁrm survival. However,
this prevents us from investigating extensive-margin responses at the ﬁrm level as well as the

    42Eurostat – Structural Business Statistics, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/
structural-business-statistics/database, accessed February 21, 2023. We thank an anony-
mous referee for suggesting this source to us.

                                                         18
Table B.10: Firm Exit and ETS Participation

                           Pr (Firm Exit)

                      (1)    (2)           (3)

Treated               -0.086** 0.002 0.049
                       (0.029) (0.032) (0.033)

Sector Fixed Effects   No     Yes           Yes
Firm Size Control      No     No            Yes
Mean                  0.397  0.397         0.397
Observations          3,262  3,262         3,262
R2                    0.002  0.111         0.122

Notes: This table reports coefﬁcient estimates from a cross-sectional
OLS regression. The dependent variable equals 1 for ﬁrms never ob-
served after 2004 and zero otherwise. Sector ﬁxed effects are at the
SUPERNCE level (deﬁned in 3). Robust standard errors are reported
in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels are indicated as * 0.10, ** 0.05,
*** 0.01.

contribution of ﬁrm exit to reductions in emissions. To explore the potential for this margin we
investigate whether there is any differential attrition between regulated and unregulated ﬁrms after
the introduction of the ETS.

    Using the raw sample, we identify 3,262 ﬁrms that are (i) observed in the base year and (ii)
have not exited before 2004. For those ﬁrms, we construct a sample exit dummy that takes a value
of one for ﬁrms never observed after 2004. Table B.10 reports the results of a cross-sectional OLS
regression of this variable on the treatment indicator. Column 1 shows that ETS ﬁrms are less
likely to exit than non-ETS ﬁrms. However, this correlation becomes much smaller and statisti-
cally insigniﬁcant after including sector ﬁxed effects (column 2) and controls for ﬁrm size (column
3). These ﬁndings suggest that the ETS did not lead to systematically different exit patterns con-
ditional on basic ﬁrm characteristics. As such, we conclude that our intensive margin analysis is
unlikely to have substantially underestimated the effects of the EU ETS on emissions or economic
performance.

C Abatement Investment and other Emissions Reducing Mea-
     sures

Section 5 argues that the main mechanism driving our estimated reductions in emissions is the
investment in new abatement capital. This appendix compiles more speciﬁc information on the
nature of these investments from two datasets: (i) the Antipol survey introduced in Section 3, and
(ii) data from telephone interviews with managers of French manufacturing ﬁrms.

                      19
C.1 The Antipol survey

The Annual Survey on Environmental Protection Studies and Investments (Antipol) is collected by
INSEE. Metadata and questionnaires (in French) for recent years are available online.43

    In our analysis of ﬁrm investments, we ﬁnd evidence that ﬁrms made substantial integrated
investments (Table 3, column 6).

    Integrated investments are deﬁned as investments in “production tools to make them better
performing in environmental terms than other equipment with similar functions and characteristics.
This category includes equipment that generates less pollution compared to other tools available
on the market (e.g. acquisition of less polluting electric vehicles, less noisy machines, emitting
less smoke, less greenhouse gases, generating less waste [emphasis added]). Only the expenses
dedicated to the abating pollution are taken into account here.”

    Since these examples are not very speciﬁc, we turn to an additional data source that is more
suited to providing insights into speciﬁc measures and investments that ﬁrms may have made to
abate emissions.

C.2 Emission-reducing measures as reported by managers

To complement our understanding of the investments ﬁrms made, we use qualitative data from a
broad-based survey of managers at medium-sized European manufacturing ﬁrms. The data were
collected by Martin et al. (2014) using a bias-reducing, “double-blind” telephone interview method
developed by Bloom & van Reenen (2007). Participating ﬁrms were drawn at random from all
mid-sized ﬁrms contained in a large commercial database (Bureau van Dijk, 2008). In France, 238
such ﬁrms were contacted between late August and October 2009, of which 140 were interviewed.
Due to oversampling of EU ETS ﬁrms, 92 of the ﬁrms participate in the EU ETS. For a detailed
description of the interview process and data collection, the reader is referred to Online Appendix
A of Martin et al. (2014).

    We focus on interview responses pertaining to measures that were implemented at the produc-
tion site to reduce CO2 emissions. Managers were asked “Can you tell me what measures you have
adopted in order to reduce GHG emissions (or energy consumption) on this site? Have you bought
any new equipment, or have you changed the way you produce?” Table C.1 summarizes these
measures. Column (1) reports the percentage share of adopters for different measures, organized
in ﬁve broad categories. The adoption rates highlight the importance of optimization processes
targeted at heating, waste heat recovery, industry-speciﬁc processes or machinery, and lighting.
These measures were adopted by at least 30% of respondents and are consistent with sizeable po-
tentials for waste heat recovery identiﬁed in the technical literature (cf. Ammar et al., 2012; Barma
et al., 2017; Chowdhury et al., 2018).44

    Of the respondents, 15%-30% reported adopting measures that include switching to natural
gas, modernizing the compressed air system, innovating in the production processes, upgrading
the energy management system, as well as improving waste management and running employee
awareness campaigns to reduce energy use.

    43See https://www.insee.fr/fr/metadonnees/source/serie/s1232, last accessed on February
24, 2023.

    44We thank an anonymous referee for pointing us to this literature.

                                                         20
                 Table C.1: Adoption of emissions reducing measures

                                         (1)           (2)      (3)           (4)

                                         All measures adopted   Most signiﬁcant measure

                                         Share of      ETS      Share of      ETS

                                         adopters (%)  Firm     adopters (%)  Firm

I. Heating and cooling                   55            0.39∗∗∗  19            0.16∗∗

1. Optimized use of process heat         (50)          (0.08)   (40)          (0.07)

2. Modernization of cooling /            6             -0.09∗   1             -0.03
refrigeration system
3. Optimization of air                   (25)          (0.05)   (9)           (0.03)
conditioning system
4. Optimization of exhaust air           0             -0.02    -
system / district heating system
                                         (8)           (0.02)

                                         32            0.01     8             -0.01

                                         (47)          (0.08)   (26)          (0.05)

II. More climate-friendly energy generation on site

1. Installation of CHP plant             9             0.08     8             0.07

2. Biogas feed-in into local             (29)          (0.04)   (26)          (0.04)
CHP plant or domestic gas grid
3. Switching to natural gas              0             -0.02    -

4. Exploitation of                       (8)           (0.02)
renewable energy source
                                         20            0.06     9             -0.06

                                         (41)          (0.07)   (29)          (0.06)

                                         8             0.06     7             0.02

                                         (27)          (0.04)   (25)          (0.05)

III. Machinery

1. Modernization of                      15            0.10∗    4             -0.02
                                                       (0.06)
compressed air system                    (36)          0.36∗∗   (20)          (0.05)
                                                       (0.07)
2. Other industry-speciﬁc production     36             -0.12   17            0.16∗∗∗
                                                       (0.08)
process optimization/machine upgrade     (48)                   (37)          (0.06)

3. Production process                    28                     12            -0.07

innovation                               (45)                   (32)          (0.07)

IV. Energy management                    10            -0.10∗   2             0.02

1. Introduction of energy                (30)          (0.06)   (13)          (0.02)
management system
2. Submetering / upgrade of              21            -0.31    2             0.02
existing energy management system
3. (External) energy audit               (41)          (0.08)   (13)          (0.02)

4. Installation of timers                10            0.03     -
attached to machinery
5. Installation of                       (30)          (0.05)
heating systems
                                         12            -0.04    2             -0.02

                                         (33)          (0.06)   (13)          (0.03)

                                         6             0.02     1

                                         (23)          (0.04)   (9)

V. Other measures on production site

1. Modernization of                      31            -0.22∗∗  4             -0.10∗

lighting system                          (47)          (0.09)   (20)          (0.05)

2. Energy-efﬁcient site extension/       14            -0.05    1             -0.03

improved insulation/building management  (34)          (0.06)   (9)           (0.03)

3. Employee awareness campaigns          23            -0.03    2             -0.02

and staff trainings                      (42)          (0.08)   (13)          (0.03)

4. Non-technical reorganization          1             -0.04    2             -0.05

of the production process                (15)          (0.03)   (13)          (0.04)

5. Installation of energy                2             -0.04    -

efﬁcient IT system                       (15)          (0.03)

6. Improved waste                        24            -0.11    2             -0.05

management / recycling                   (43)          (0.08)   (13)          (0.04)

Notes: Based on telephone interviews with managers of 140 French manufacturing ﬁrms, 92 of which were EU
ETS participants in 2009. Columns (1) and (3) report the mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) of the adop-
tion rate for a given measure. Columns (2) and (4) report the coefﬁcient and robust standard error (in parentheses)
on EU ETS participation in a linear regression of adoption on a participation dummy and a constant.

                                            21
    We investigate how the adoption of these measures are associated with participation in the EU
ETS. Column (2) reports the coefﬁcient obtained in a linear regression of adoption on the ETS
dummy and a constant. We estimate that participation in the EU ETS is associated with a higher
likelihood of optimizing the use of process heat and the optimization of processes speciﬁc to their
industry. By contrast, ETS participation is negatively associated with modernizing the lighting
system.

    Column (3) summarizes the adoption rates for the one measure that achieved the largest re-
duction in carbon emissions. Managers were asked: “Which one of these measures achieved the
largest carbon saving?”, referring to the measures named in response to the previous question. The
results highlight once again the importance of optimizing the use of process heat for reducing car-
bon emissions and industry-speciﬁc machine upgrades or process optimization that are positively
associated with EU ETS participation (reported in column 4).

    We note that these correlations do not necessarily represent causal relationships. Together with
our main results, however, they provide supporting evidence for the hypothesis that ﬁrms invested
in new processes to reduce emissions.

D Derivations and Calculations

D.1 Carbon Price Effect on Revenue TFP

Let wE denote log(WE). Abstracting from ﬁrm and time indices for simplicity, we can write the
effect of the EU ETS on measured (revenue) TFP as

                                                                                              

     ∂ω      =   ∂r                                     ∂x              γ  −                sX   ∂kit               (25)
     ∂wE        ∂wE                 − X∈{E,M,L} sX ∂wE            − µ                            ∂wE
                                                                              X ∈{E ,M ,L}

             = 1 ∂q − αE                           1 ∂q
                                                           −1
                µ ∂wE µ µ ∂wE

                −                         αX  ∂q      −      γ−        X∈{E,M,L} αX         1 ∂q
                                          µ2  ∂w                          µ                 µ ∂wE
                               X ∈{M ,L}

where we have substituted sX   =    αX    ,   ∂r   =    1 ∂q   ,   ∂e  =   1 ∂q   − 1,   ∂e  =    1   ∂q  ,   ∂k  =  1 ∂q
                                     µ       ∂wE        µ ∂wE     ∂wE      µ ∂wE        ∂wE       µ  ∂wE     ∂wE     µ ∂wE

using equations (7), (5), and the factor share identity (10). Taking logs of equation (6) and taking

the partial derivative yields   ∂q  =  −     αE µ  which we substitute into (25) to get
                               ∂wE           µ−γ

                                                                                                          

∂ω = 1 1 − αE −                                       αX − γ −           X∈{E,M,L} αX         ∂q   + αE
                                                                                               ∂wE
∂wE       µ                    µ                          µ                   µ             

                                             X ∈{M ,L}

          1          γ               ∂qit          +  αE                  γ    αE + αE = 0
     =          1−                  ∂wEit                    =− 1−            µ−γ µ

          µ          µ                                                    µ

                                                          22
D.2 Aggregate Effects of the EU ETS

Our objective is to understand the contribution of the EU ETS to aggregate emission reductions
during the period of analysis. For consistency, we construct aggregate emissions from our mi-
crodata. As with our main analysis, we do not speak to process emissions. Let the variable CO2
denote aggregate industrial combustion emissions in France. This variable is plotted as a black line
in Figure 1.

    Because we construct the aggregate from the microdata we have aggregate ETS and non-ETS
emissions. This allows us to construct counterfactual aggregate emissions for ETS ﬁrms had they
not been regulated. We do this using our matched-sample difference-in-differences estimates from
Table 1 as follows:

                                               4

          CO2(t)NoET S = CO2(t) − CO2(2000) ·                    βτ · 1{t ∈ Φτ }

                                               τ =1

    where Φτ are the treatment phases deﬁned in Section 2.2. Since only the point estimates for
Phase I and Phase II are statistically signiﬁcant, we let β4 = βˆ4, β3 = βˆ3 and β1 = β2 = 0. The
variable CO2(t)NoET S is plotted as a dark gray line in Figure 6. We calculate that annual aggregate
emissions would have been 5.4 million tonnes higher on average between 2005 and 2012 if the EU

ETS did not exist.

In addition to calculating how much higher emissions would have been absent the EU ETS, we

also calculate the contribution of the EU ETS to the aggregate decline in emissions observed since

the ETS went into effect.

We consider two benchmarks to evaluate the contribution of the ETS to aggregate emissions

reductions. First we use emissions in 2004 (the dashed line in Figure 6). As an alternative bench-

mark we estimate the linear trend in emissions prior to the EU ETS and extrapolate this trend going

forward.

Using these two benchmarks we calculate the difference between observed emissions and the

benchmarks to get an estimate of the overall change in emissions following the introduction of

the EU ETS. The overall reduction in emissions comprises not only the treatment effect of the EU

ETS, but also the effects of concurrent shocks that may have affected industrial emissions, such as

the Great Recession, concurrent policies, and technical change.

To evaluate the relative contribution of the EU ETS to the overall reduction in emissions during

this period, we calculate the average difference in emissions using the following ratio,

                           1    tT=1[CO2(t)NoET S − CO2(t)]      .
                           t     tT=1[CO2(2004) − CO2(t)]

                             1
                            T

We calculate that, on average, approximately 27% of observed emission reductions between

2005 and 2012 can be attributed to the EU ETS using 2004 emissions as a benchmark. Using the

linear trend in pre-ETS emissions, we calculate that, on average, approximately 47% of the ob-

served emissions reductions between 2005 and 2012 can be attributed to the EU ETS. While these

are non-trivial shares, we stress the need for causal research designs when evaluating the efﬁcacy

of climate policy. Extrapolating aggregate trends to draw inferences would vastly overestimate the

contribution of the EU ETS as a driver of aggregate emissions reductions.

                                23
References

Ammar, Y., Joyce, S., Norman, R., Wang, Y., & Roskilly, A. P. (2012). Low grade thermal energy
  sources and uses from the process industry in the uk. Applied Energy, 89(1), 3–20. Special issue
  on Thermal Energy Management in the Process Industries.

Barma, M., Saidur, R., Rahman, S., Allouhi, A., Akash, B., & Sait, S. M. (2017). A review
  on boilers energy use, energy savings, and emissions reductions. Renewable and Sustainable
  Energy Reviews, 79(C), 970–983.

Bloom, N. & van Reenen, J. (2007). Measuring and Explaining Management Practices across
  Firms and Countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXXII(4), 1351–1406.

Bureau van Dijk (1999-2008). ORBIS data base. http://www.bvdinfo.com. (accessed July, 2009).

Callonnec, G. (2009). Fiscalite´ compare´e de l’e´nergie et du co2 en europe et en france. ADEME
  & vous, Strate´gie & e´tudes, (20), 1–6.

Chowdhury, J. I., Hu, Y., Haltas, I., Balta-Ozkan, N., Matthew, G. J., & Varga, L. (2018). Reducing
  industrial energy demand in the uk: A review of energy efﬁciency technologies and energy
  saving potential in selected sectors. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 94, 1153–
  1178.

CRE (2014). Rapport sur la contribution au service public de l’e´lectricite´ (CSPE): me´canisme, his-
  torique et prospective. https://www.cre.fr/content/download/12438/file/
  1410_CSPE.pdf. last accessed on February 19, 2023.

Martin, R., Muuˆls, M., de Preux, L., & Wagner, U. (2014). Industry compensation under relocation
  risk: A ﬁrm-level analysis of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme. American Economic Review,
  104(8), 1–24.

Re´publique Franc¸aise (2008).  First national energy efﬁciency action plan for

france.     https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/energy-efficiency/

energy-efficiency-targets-directive-and-rules/

national-action-plans-and-annual-progress-reports_en. (Last ac-

cessed on February 19, 2023).

Re´publique Franc¸aise (2011). Second national energy efﬁciency action plan for

france.     https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/energy-efficiency/

energy-efficiency-targets-directive-and-rules/

national-action-plans-and-annual-progress-reports_en. (Last ac-

cessed on February 19, 2023).

Wagner, U. J., Kassem, D., Gerster, A., Jaraite-Kazukauske, J., Klemetsen, M., Laukkanen, M.,
  Leisner, J., Martin, R., Munch, J., Muuˆls, M., Nielsen, A., de Preux, L., Rosendahl, K. E., &
  Schusser, S. (2020). Carbon Footprints of European Manufacturing Jobs: Stylized Facts and
  Implications for Climate Policy. CRC TR 224 Discussion Paper Series, University of Mannheim,
  Germany.

                                24
Zubizarreta, J. R., Paredes, R. D., & Rosenbaum, P. R. (2014). Matching for balance, pairing for
  heterogeneity in an observational study of the effectiveness of for-proﬁt and not-for-proﬁt high
  schools in Chile. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 8(1), 204 – 231.

                                                         25
